 About - Atom Computing About Technology Atom's Technology Technical White Paper Product AC1000 News & Resources News Scientific Publications Media Resources Tech Perspectives Careers Employee Spotlights Current Openings Contact Our Singular Focus Scalable Quantum Computers Our team is developing large-scale quantum computers to help companies and researchers achieve unprecedented computational breakthroughs. Using arrays of optically-trapped neutral atoms, we are building cutting-edge systems for on-premises deployment with advanced features such as long coherence times and mid-circuit measurement. Our unique approach to highly scalable quantum computing and path to fault tolerance offers new tools for quantum algorithm developers to tackle increasingly challenging applications. January 2018 Atom Computing Founded August 2019 Trapped Our First Atom May 2020 First nuclear spin qubits created from atomic arrays of optically-trapped neutral atoms July 2021 Phoenix, 100-Qubit System, Unveiled January 2022 Closed $60M Series B to Build Second-Generation Commercial Systems May 2022 Publication in Nature Communications: >40s Coherence Times on Atom Computing's Nuclear Spin Qubits Executive Leadership Ben Bloom, PhD CEO ​& Founder Read Bio Visit our LinkedIn Jonathan King, PhD Chief Scientist ​& Co-Founder Read Bio Visit our LinkedIn Sarah Murrow VP, Human Resources Read Bio Visit our LinkedIn Justin Ging Chief Product Officer Read Bio Visit our LinkedIn Kristen Pudenz, PhD Chief Programs Officer Read Bio Visit our LinkedIn Kevin Messerle Chief Financial Officer Read Bio Visit our LinkedIn Ted Weverka, PhD VP, Optical Engineering Read Bio Visit our LinkedIn Michael Sorensen VP, Software & Control Systems Read Bio Visit our LinkedIn Scientific Advisors Jun Ye, PhD Scientific Advisor Read Bio Visit our LinkedIn Bert de Jong, PhD Scientific Advisor Read Bio Visit our LinkedIn Eliot Kapit, PhD Scientific Advisor Read Bio Visit our LinkedIn Jon Simon, PhD Scientific Advisor Read Bio Visit our LinkedIn Board of Directors Ben Bloom, PhD Founder & CEO​ Atom Computing Read Bio Dror Berman​ Managing Partner Innovation Endeavors​ Read Bio Ethan Batraski Partner Venrock Read Bio Curtis McKee Partner Third Point Ventures Read Bio Ken Braithwaite 77th Secretary of the Navy Read Bio Pri Narang, PhD Partner DCVC Read Bio Atom's Investors Rob Hays is CEO & President of Atom Computing. He has more than 20 years of technology leadership, pushing the limits of computing performance and innovation. Before joining Atom Computing, Rob was Vice President and Chief Strategy Officer for Lenovo’s Infrastructure Solutions Group and Vice President and General Manager at Intel where he was responsible for leading Intel’s Xeon processor roadmaps. Rob holds a bachelor’s degree in computer engineering from Georgia Tech and two U.S. patents. Ben Bloom is Chief Executive Officer and Founder at Atom Computing where he leads the company’s development of logical qubits, fault-tolerant quantum computing, and neutral atom systems. Ben has worked on various quantum technologies and founded Atom Computing in January 2018 after realizing neutral atom systems offer the best path to large-scale quantum computing. Ben holds a bachelor’s degree from MIT and PhD in physics from the University of Colorado-Boulder where he helped develop one of the most accurate atomic clocks ever constructed. He has co-authored several scientific publications and holds multiple U.S. patents. Dr. Jonathan King is Chief Scientist and Co-Founder at Atom Computing where he leads the applications team responsible for benchmarking and use-case development. Jonathan has more than a decade of experience as a researcher in quantum technologies. Before joining Atom Computing, he was a postdoctoral researcher at the University of California, Berkeley, where he worked on a variety of experimental and theoretical projects in the realm of nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Jonathan holds a PhD in chemical engineering from UC-Berkeley, a bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering from Kansas State University, and two U.S. patents. Robin Coxe is Atom Computing’s Senior Vice President of Control Systems & Software, leading engineering and software teams, which develop advanced electronics to orchestrate quantum operations through a robust software stack. Robin has more than 20 years of engineering and team leadership experience in hardware and digital logic design. Before joining Atom, Robin was the R&D Engineering Manager at National Instruments where she led software-defined radio product R&D. Robin holds a PhD in experimental elementary particle physics from the University of Chicago and a bachelor’s degree in physics from Harvard University. Sarah Murrow is Vice President of Human Resources at Atom Computing. She brings more than 20 years of HR experience, including a strong knowledge of employee relations, talent acquisition and staffing, compensation, leadership, employee development, and benefits, as well as a thorough understanding of corporate and legal compliance. She previously led human resources for Envysion, Connexn, Accera, and Clean Energy Collection. She holds a bachelor’s degree in business management from Colorado State University. Justin Ging is Chief Product Officer at Atom Computing, leading product management and customer experience for Atom Computing. He has more than 20 years of product management, product marketing, and sales experience. Before joining Atom Computing, Justin worked as Chief Commercial Officer at Honeywell Quantum Solutions, and previously led marketing teams at Samsung, Aptina Imaging, and Analog Devices, and held engineering roles at Bell Labs and Lockheed Martin. He holds multiple degrees from MIT including an MBA, bachelor’s and master’s degrees in electrical engineering and computer science, and a master’s degree in materials science. Kevin McClaughry is Vice President of Finance at Atom Computing. He brings more than 25 years of financial leadership to the role with experience in product development analysis, strategic planning, decision analytics, and financial reporting. Kevin previously held financial and operational leadership positions at Intel, most recently as Director of Xeon Engineering Operations and as Senior Controller for Datacenter Product Development. Kevin holds both a bachelor’s degree in economics and an MBA from Willamette University. Greg Muhlner is the Vice President of Public Sector at Atom Computing. He has more than 15 years of business development, program management, and sales experience. Before joining Atom Computing, he led a cross-functional sales and contracting team for Rebellion Defense focused on delivering AI-enabled software into the defense and national security mission. He previously led Navy and USMC Sales at Amazon Web Services. Greg spent 11 years as a Naval Special Warfare (SEAL) Officer, participating in Operation Enduring Freedom (Afghanistan) and Operation Iraqi Freedom. He has a master’s degree in International Affairs from the Johns Hopkins School of International Studies and a bachelor’s degree in International Relations from Stanford University. Kristen Pudenz is Chief Program Officer at Atom Computing, translating the Atom Computing roadmap into action through carefully crafted programs of execution. This includes overseeing program management for Atom Computing and providing executive leadership for strategic external-facing partnerships and collaborations. Previously she was Corporate Lead for Quantum at Lockheed Martin, setting the vision and advocating for quantum programs across the corporation. Kristen received her electrical engineering Ph.D. from the University of Southern California, where she invented Quantum Annealing Correction, a novel and highly practical error correction technique. Dr. Ted Weverka is the Vice President of Optical Engineering at Atom Computing leading the team to develop robust optical systems to control quantum operations. Among Ted’s previous roles, he developed optical computing systems at Fathom Computing and as founder and CTO of Network Photonics he developed wavelength switched communication systems. Ted holds a bachelor’s degree in applied physics from Caltech and PhD in electrical engineering from the University of Colorado-Boulder. He has authored numerous scientific publications and patents. Michael Sorensen is VP of Software Engineering and Control Systems at Atom Computing, where he leads the development of the classical compute that powers the company's neutral atom quantum computers, from low-level control systems and hardware integration through to the service layer APIs. Before Atom Computing, Michael held engineering and technical leadership roles at Uber, Blue Origin, and Amazon, bringing a background in large-scale and highly reliable systems to the challenges of building full-stack quantum hardware. He holds a MS in Computer Science from Johns Hopkins University. Kevin Messerle is Chief Financial Officer at Atom Computing. Before joining Atom, Kevin served as CFO at York Space Systems, Inc where revenue grew by over 500%, playing a critical role in the 2026 IPO on the NYSE and the acquisition of six companies. Prior to that, Kevin served as a senior investment manager at Summit Partners, specializing in Aerospace & Defense, Energy and Automotive deals. Kevin also previously served as an investment professional at Davidson Kempner Capital Management and GE Capital. Earlier in his career, Kevin was a locomotive design engineer at Wabtec (formerly GE Transportation Systems). Kevin earned a BS in Mechanical Engineering from Pennsylvania State University and an MBA from the MIT Sloan School of Management. Dr. Jun Ye is a Fellow of JILA and a Fellow of NIST. Jun is a member of the National Academy of Sciences, a Fellow of the American Physical Society, and a Fellow of the Optical Society of America. His research focuses on the frontiers of light-matter interactions and includes precision measurement, quantum physics and ultracold matter, and much more. He has co-authored more than 350 papers and has delivered more than 550 invited talks. Dr. Bert de Jong is a senior scientist at Lawrence Berkeley National Lab where he leads the computation sciences department and the Applied Computing for Scientific Discovery group. Research in his group encompasses exascale computing, quantum computing and AI for scientific discovery. de Jong also serves as the deputy director for the National Quantum Initiative Quantum Systems Accelerator (QSA)i and the team director of the multi-institution Accelerated Research for Quantum Computing (ARQC) Team AIDE-QC, both of which are funded by the U.S. Department of Energy’s Advanced Scientific Computing Research program. He is the founding editor-in-chief of Electronic Structure, an IOPscience journal, and a principal editor for Computer Physics Communications. de Jong earned his doctorate in theoretical chemistry at the University of Groningen, and he is a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). Dr. Eliot Kapit is an associate professor of physics and director of quantum engineering at Colorado School of Mines. His research focus is on quantum information science, particularly on routes to achieve practical and scalable quantum advantage in noisy, near-term hardware. He received his PhD in Physics from Cornell University in 2012. Dr. Jon Simon is Associate Professor of Physics & Applied Physics, Stanford University, where he focuses on the interface of condensed matter physics and quantum optics. Particularly, he describes his research as “teaching photons to behave like matter, using optical cavities”. He received his PhD in Physics from Harvard in 2010. Rob Hays is CEO & President of Atom Computing. He has more than 20 years of technology leadership, pushing the limits of computing performance and innovation. Before joining Atom Computing, Rob was Vice President and Chief Strategy Officer for Lenovo’s Infrastructure Solutions Group and Vice President and General Manager at Intel where he was responsible for leading Intel’s Xeon processor roadmaps. Rob holds a bachelor’s degree in computer engineering from Georgia Tech and two U.S. patents. Ben Bloom is Founder and Chief Executive Officer at Atom Computing where he leads the company’s development of logical qubits, fault-tolerant quantum computing, and neutral atom systems. Ben has worked on various quantum technologies and founded Atom Computing in January 2018 after realizing neutral atom systems offer the best path to large-scale quantum computing. Ben holds a bachelor’s degree from MIT and PhD in physics from the University of Colorado-Boulder where he helped develop one of the most accurate atomic clocks ever constructed. He has co-authored several scientific publications and holds multiple U.S. patents. Dror Berman co-founded Innovation Endeavors with Eric Schmidt, former CEO and Executive Chairman of Google/Alphabet Inc., in 2010. Dror invests in early-stage startups that are driving exponential rates of change in their industries — from agriculture and computational biology to fulfillment centers and satellites. He earned an MBA from Stanford Graduate School of Business and a B.S. in Computer Science from Ben-Gurion University. Ethan is a Partner based in Palo Alto, partnering with early-stage entrepreneurs building breakthroughs across AI and frontier systems Immediately prior to joining Venrock, Ethan held executive roles at Facebook, Box (IPO 2015), and Yahoo!, while an active angel investor. Ethan is the lead or co-lead inventor on 12 patents. You can find Ethan’s writings on AI and engineering at substack.com/@ethanjamesb. Curtis McKee joined Third Point Ventures in 2021, focusing on investments across the IT landscape. Previously, Curtis was AVP and the Head of Corporate and Investor Development at Arista Networks, where he led Mergers and Acquisitions, including the Big Switch Networks and Awake Security transactions, as well as Ventures and Investor Relations. Prior to Arista, Curtis was an Investor and Corporate Development leader for Intel Capital, concentrating on Cloud, IOT, Enterprise SW, HPC, 5G, Edge/Networking and AI sectors. He also led Operations as Chief of Staff and Technical Assistant for the Datacenter Group's Enterprise Software Division. He joined Intel following the Company’s acquisition of Fulcrum Microsystems, where he was Head of Business Development. He began his career in engineering roles at Broadcom and Marvell. Curtis holds an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania and a B.S. in Electrical Engineering from Purdue University. Ken Braithwaite was sworn in as the Secretary of the Navy in 2020 and previously served as a U.S. ambassador to Norway. He graduated from the U.S. Naval Academy and, afterward, was commissioned as an ensign in the U.S. Navy. Braithwaite, a one-star rear admiral, left active duty in 1993 and continued his service in the Navy Reserve while holding several executive leadership positions in the healthcare and chemical industries. Dr. Prineha Narang is a distinguished American scientist, engineer, and entrepreneur. Dr. Narang is a Professor in Physical Sciences, and in Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). She is a partner at DCVC, a leading deep tech venture capital firm, enabling founders to push the boundaries of computing, sensing, and networking to turn break­through science into transformative businesses. She received an M.S. and Ph.D. in Applied Physics from the California Institute of Technology (Caltech). Dr. Narang is an elected Fellow of the American Physical Society (APS). Her work has been recognized by many awards and special designations, including the Guggenheim Fellowship in Physics, a Maria Goeppert Mayer Award from the APS, Mildred Dresselhaus Prize, Bessel Research Award from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, a Max Planck Award from the Max Planck Society, being named a Moore Inventor Fellow by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, among others. At the intersection of physics, engineering, and computation, she is known for her research and leadership in translating breakthrough discoveries into real-world technologies. In 2023 she was appointed a U.S. Science Envoy by the Secretary of State; she was reappointed to the role in 2024 to advocate for quantum science, technology, and innovation internationally and establish American leadership in the field. She has served in policy, technology, and national security facing roles, and is a non-resident Senior Fellow at the Foundation for American Innovation. In 2023 she was elected to the Board of Trustees of the California Institute of Technology (Caltech). About Technology News & Resources Tech Perspectives Careers Contact 1901 Fourth St. Suite 200, Berkeley CA 94710 Visit our Facebook Visit our Twitter Visit our LinkedIn Visit our YouTube channel © 2026 ATOM COMPUTING, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Privacy Policy Visit our Facebook Visit our Twitter Visit our LinkedIn Visit our YouTube channel 1901 Fourth St. Suite 200, Berkeley CA 94710 About Technology News & Resources Tech Perspectives Careers Contact Privacy Policy Cookie Policy © 2022 ATOM COMPUTING, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED close cross menu chevron-down linkedin facebook pinterest youtube rss twitter instagram facebook-blank rss-blank linkedin-blank pinterest youtube twitter instagram 