 American Science Cloud – Genesis Mission Genesis Mission is a national initiative to build the world's most powerful scientific platform to accelerate discovery science, strengthen national security, and drive energy innovation. Skip to main content An official website of the United States government --:--:-- --- Menu About Capabilities Objectives Demos Partnerships Events News Contact Product Catalog User Docs Press enter to begin your search Search Close Search Genesis Mission RFA Awardees Looking for information about AmSC onboarding or using the MAG (Model Access Gateway)? Visit User Docs × American Science Cloud Accelerating innovation with AI and advanced computing The American Science Cloud (AmSC) is a cornerstone of the Genesis Mission’s platform—an integrated, federated platform that connects AI models, curated scientific data, workflows, and computing resources across DOE laboratories to accelerate discovery, enable autonomous science, and scale impact to the broader research ecosystem. What is AmSC? A Platform for Transformative Science AmSC is a secure, federated, and science-optimized cloud environment that integrates the DOE’s world-leading computing and experimental facilities, data resources, and high-performance networks. AmSC enables DOE scientists to create, access, and integrate world-class AI-ready datasets, run scalable model training on leadership-class systems, perform distributed simulations, control instruments, and move data efficiently across sites. Infrastructure Partners What will AmSC provide? Advanced AI Tools for Scientific Discovery AmSC provides core platform services designed to make DOE data and compute usable at mission scale—securely and consistently across partners. 01 Data Services Ensure DOE’s vital data assets are FAIR and AI-ready. 02 Model Services Enable access to state-of-the-art models for scientific discovery. 03 AI Services Harness leadership-class systems for extreme-scale model training and inference. 04 Infrastructure Services Provide secure, uniform access to compute, storage, and networking across DOE and cloud partners. What Will AmSC Achieve? A New Era of Interconnected Research As a foundational pillar of the Genesis Mission, AmSC establishes a durable, extensible platform designed to help transform the scientific method—embedding AI and advanced computing directly into the full lifecycle of discovery. By combining intuitive interfaces, scalable services, and DOE’s unparalleled scientific assets, AmSC integrates models, data, workflows, and compute into a unified environment that enables faster hypothesis generation, experimentation, and insight. Once deployed, the AmSC Platform will power Genesis mission use cases, deliver core API-driven services, and demonstrate seamless interoperability across facilities and partners—laying the groundwork for autonomous, AI-driven science at scale. Featured Research Science Demos Science teams are using early prototypes of American Science Cloud services to accelerate discovery, enable autonomous science, and scale impact to the broader research ecosystem. View demonstration videos explaining how these tools are helping them address their science problems. AI-Driven Real-Time Detector Data Analysis for sPHENIX and the Electron-Ion Collider This demonstration shows how artificial intelligence and American Science Cloud capabilities can transform real-time scientific computing for nuclear and particle physics. By combining high-speed, high-throughput data movement; AI-driven compression; metadata tracking; model management; and real-time monitoring, the system reduces massive detector data while preserving the most important information for scientific discovery. As these capabilities continue to evolve, they will enable scalable, intelligent data processing for next-generation experiments, such as the Electron-Ion Collider, while accelerating discoveries in fundamental science. Credits Ai Kagawa, James Leonardi, Yi Huang, Yihui (Ray) Ren, Michael Begel, James Dunlop, Alexei Klimentov, Meifeng Lin, Adolfy Hoisie ( PI) - all at BNL. DIII-D Fusion digital Twin Fusion is the process that powers the sun, and the quest to realize this clean, abundant energy source here on earth is what drives research at the DIII-D National Fusion Facility. This fusion device generates a short-lived plasma for study approximately once every 20 minutes. Changes to the digital plasma control system are informed by data analysis during this short interval. Such a mode of operation places a large premium on rapid data analysis resulting in a data set that needs to be assimilated in near real-time by the scientific users in the control room. The DIII-D Digital Twin is being developed to enhance the facility&#39;s scientific capability through assisting in control room decision making as well as longer time-scale issues such as the impact of facility design changes on plasma performance. Incorporating the digital twin with the AmSC infrastructure enables many predictive scenarios to be remotely executed at NERSC and ALCF using the At-Scale API under the time constraints of ongoing experiments. The Fusion Data Platform both provides data movement and is an infrastructure component being provided back to the AmSC. Many faster-than-realtime surrogate models have been trained on IRI-obtained datasets and tuned with the aid of MLFlows. These models enable the digital twin to be performant, and the platform of integration demonstrates a repeatable pattern for digital twins of other facilities. A natural language interface enabled by the AmSC AI-Services allows operators to interrogate the newly simulated data and select superior options for immediate use in the control room. The DIII-D Digital twin integrates these American Science cloud resources with high-fidelity modeling to create an interactive control room tool, driving innovation and accelerating progress toward a future powered by fusion energy Credits Aragon, M. (General Atomics), Boyes, W.(General Atomics), Campbell, D. (Nvidia), Clark, M.C. (General Atomics), Denk, S. (General Atomics), Deshpande, A. (General Atomics), Flanagan, S. (General Atomics), Gahl, M. (ORAU), Garcia, F. (General Atomics), Harris, N. (OSU), Huffnagle, N. (General Atomics), Keller, A. (General Atomics), Kwon, K. (ORAU), Kostuk, M. (General Atomics), Le, J. (General Atomics), Lyons, B. (General Atomics), Margo, M. (General Atomics), McClenaghan, J. (General Atomics), Nazikian, R. (General Atomics), Neiser, T. (General Atomics), Nguyen, J. (General Atomics), Odstrcil, T. (General Atomics), Olofsson, K.E.J. (General Atomics), Orozco, D. (General Atomics), Prechel, G. (ORAU), Rodriguez, J. (OSU), Simpson, C. (ALCF), Sammuli, B. (General Atomics), Schissel, D.P. (General Atomics), Shi, N. (General Atomics), Smith, S. P. (General Atomics), Stone, J. (Nvidia) Tyler, N. (NERSC), Xing, Z. (General Atomics), Zuniga, C. (General Atomics), FemtoMind – Revealing the Origin of Matter Credits Robert Edwards - JLab Michael Wagman - FNAL Peter Boyle - BNL Jie Chen - JLab George Fleming - FNAL Daniel Hackett -FNAL Chris Kelly - BNL Joseph Karpie -JLab Yaohang Li - ODU Nesar Ramachandra - ANL Felix Ringer - SBU Nobuo Sato - JLab Lightshow AI: Real-Time X-Ray Spectroscopy Analysis for Quantum and Energy Materials X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) is a powerful technique for probing the local atomic and electronic structure of materials, providing critical insights into their properties and functions. However, interpreting XAS data collected at synchrotron light sources often requires months of offline analysis, creating a major bottleneck in the scientific discovery cycle. To address this challenge, we developed LightshowAI, an AI-driven workflow for real-time XAS analysis. By leveraging the resources of the American Science Cloud, LightshowAI reduces the time from data acquisition to scientific insight from months to seconds, enabling informed decision-making during active synchrotron experiments and ultimately accelerating scientific discovery. Credits Brookhaven Lab: Deyu Lu, Sairam Sri Vatsavai, Christopher Kelly, Ozgur Kilic, Xiaohui Qu, Sara E. Mason, Chuntian Cao, Lu Ma, Kari Barry, Yevgen Matviychuk, Daniel Allan, Stuart Wilkins, Anton Yanaky (SBU)​ Collaborators: Samuel S. Welborn (SLAC S3DF), Tim J. Dunn (SSRL) AmSC staff support: Huihuo Zheng, Thomas D. Uram, Karlo Berket, Valerie Hendrix, Drew Paine Shared Multi-Facility Inference Platform Across Multiple Experiments This video demonstrates how the advanced computing capabilities in the American Science Cloud (AmSC) and Genesis Platform help to accelerate AI-enabled scientific workflows from multiple large-scale experiments. Using real-world applications from high-energy and nuclear physics, this demonstration shows how advanced AI models can be deployed as a shared service, enabling researchers to process massive scientific datasets more efficiently while accessing specialized computing resources on demand. The work illustrates how AmSC and the Scientific User Facilities Infrastructure Partnership is helping connect AI models, data resources, and national-scale computing infrastructure to accelerate scientific discovery Credits Meghna Bhattacharya - FNAL Julien Esseiva - LBNL Xiangyang Ju - LBNL Dmitry Kondratyev - Purdue University Nhan Tran - FNAL Steven Timm - FNAL Mike Wang - FNAL Nicholas Schwarz - ANL Paolo Calafiura - LBNL Transforming Astrophysics with OpenCosmo on the American Science Cloud The American Science Cloud enables astrophysics researchers to use AI and supercomputing together to explore enormous cosmology datasets and ask bigger questions about the universe. Astrophysics researchers can move beyond limited datasets and use AI plus supercomputing to explore the universe at a scale that would not be possible otherwise. Credits Patrick Wells (ANL) Michael Bühlmann (ANL) Salman Habib (ANL) Nicholas Schwarz (ANL) Paolo Calafiura (LBNL) × Read more ← Previous Next → Public-Private Partnerships Framework Co-design, Validate, and Scale Together AmSC creates a practical pathway for industry and the DOE ecosystem to co-design, validate, and operationalize capabilities that meet extreme-scale scientific and national security workloads—while expanding durable partnerships. Technology Validation Cloud service providers and vendors validate technologies against extreme-scale scientific and national security workloads, co-design solutions with DOE researchers, and evolve pilots into sustainable offerings. Long-term Partnerships Participation strengthens long-term relationships with DOE and expands opportunities for innovation. Secure data access in CSP environments creates new avenues for industry and the public to leverage scientific data. Strategic Computing Reserve AmSC charts a path toward a National Strategic Computing and AI Reserve—supporting steady-state research and surge capacity in times of crisis to ensure resilience and U.S. competitiveness. Events Upcoming events and recent sessions Explore AmSC events, featured sessions, and follow-up materials. All Upcoming Past Featured No events are available right now. Check back soon for updates. Show more × News News & Announcements Recent AmSC updates, highlights, and announcements. ‹ › No news items yet. Support Contact Us Submit a request and the AmSC team will follow up as soon as possible Name (Required) First Last Email (Required) Subject of your question/problem (Required) Describe your question/problem (Required) Submit © 2026 American Science Cloud. Close Menu An official website of the United States government About Capabilities Objectives Demos Partnerships Events News Contact Product Catalog User Docs 