 Savannah River Site | Department of Energy Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Policy & Priorities Main Menu Policy & Priorities View all Policy & Priorities Increase American Energy Production Expanding domestic energy resources to support national needs and economic growth. Energy Innovation Driving research and development to shape the future of energy systems and technologies. Energy Exports Supporting global energy markets through U.S. energy production and trade. Affordable Energy for Consumers Promoting access to reliable and cost-effective energy for households and businesses. Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) Managing emergency fuel reserves to support national energy security. Nuclear Security Maintaining the safety, security, and effectiveness of the nation’s nuclear deterrent. Nuclear Energy Advancing nuclear technologies to support energy, security, and innovation goals. Energy Reliability Ensuring consistent and dependable energy delivery across the nation. Energy Infrastructure Strengthening and modernizing the systems that produce, deliver, and store energy. Leadership & Organization Main Menu Leadership & Organization View all Leadership & Organization Chris Wright Secretary of Energy James Danly Deputy Secretary of Energy Leadership & Organization Pages Staff Offices Supporting DOE operations through policy, administration, and mission services. Science and Innovation Program Offices Leading scientific research and technology development across priority areas. Independent Offices Providing oversight and specialized functions across key areas of the Department. Energy Program Offices Managing programs that support energy production, efficiency, and delivery. National Laboratories Advancing research and innovation through DOE’s National Laboratory System. Nuclear Security Offices Overseeing national security efforts related to nuclear safety and defense. Featured Hydrocarbons and Geothermal Energy Office Topics Main Menu Topics View all Topics Energy Sources Learn about the resources and technologies used to produce power across the United States. Energy Usage Explore how energy is consumed in homes, businesses, transportation, and industry. Policy Understand the laws, regulations, and strategies that guide energy decisions and national priorities. Science & Innovation See how research, discovery, and new technologies are shaping the future of energy. Economy Discover how energy affects jobs, markets, investment, and economic growth. National Security & Safety Learn how energy systems support resilience, infrastructure protection, and public safety. News & Events Main Menu News & Events View all News & Events Press Releases September 8, 2026 Hydrocarbons and Geothermal Energy Office Awards $1.2 Million to Strengthen America’s Geothermal Energy Workforce HGEO announced $1.2 million for eight teams working to build a stronger workforce… Read more Geothermal View all Press Releases Fact Sheets FACT SHEET: Delivering on President Trump's Promise to Unleash Prosperity and Security for the United States and Venezuela FACT SHEET: The Golden Era of American Nuclear Energy Has Arrived Fact Sheet: Operational Closure of Radioactive Liquid Waste Tanks View all Fact Sheets Upcoming Events Sep 9 7:00PM EDT - 11:00PM EDT Nevada EM SSAB Meeting (September 2026) Sep 10 3:00PM EDT - 4:30PM EDT Energy Efficiency Measures on Tribal Facilities Sep 11 1:00PM EDT - 2:00PM EDT Informational Webinar: Accelerating Scale-up and Pre-piloting of Emerging Chemical Technologies (ASPECT) View all Events About Main Menu About Mission Supporting USA energy, science, and security priorities. History & Achievements Nobel Prize Laureates Contact Us Access general information and ways to connect with the Department of Energy. Careers Internships & Fellowships Apprenticeships & Workforce Development Work at DOE Funding Opportunities Breadcrumb Office of Environmental Management Savannah River Site Savannah River Site The Savannah River Site, a 310-square-mile-site in Aiken, South Carolina, focused on the production of plutonium and tritium for use in the manufacture of nuclear weapons from its inception in the early 1950s until the end of the Cold War. In 1992, the focus at SRS turned to environmental cleanup, nuclear materials management, and research and development activities. Savannah River Photo Gallery Photo Caption A view of the Savannah River Site's Saltstone Disposal Unit 11 under construction, with 10 of 25 wall sections, 117 of 208 columns and 14 of 14 floor sections complete. The U.S. Department of Energy awarded the Saltstone Disposal Unit 10, 11 and 12 Project Team the Project Controls Excellence Award. Photo Caption Energy Secretary Chris Wright addresses officials at the opening of the Advanced Manufacturing Collaborative facility in Aiken, South Carolina. The 63,000-square-foot state-of-the-art facility connects industry, academia and government to increase capabilities in areas such as additive manufacturing, artificial intelligence-driven automation, and novel materials for fusion energy and energy resilience. Photo Caption The U.S. Department of Energy Office of Environmental Management achieved preliminary cease waste removal for Tank 4 in F Tank Farm, pictured, at the Savannah River Site a year ahead of schedule. Photo Caption The canister double-stack team at Savannah River Mission Completion comprises members of the construction craft crew, engineers, radiological control inspectors, project managers and more. The team is modifying additional storage positions in a second glass waste storage building to accommodate two canisters stacked atop each other, a space-saving project that saves tens of millions of dollars. Photo Caption A High Flux Isotope Reactor core is lifted in an underwater storage basin at Savannah River Site. The fuel elements, an inner and an outer element, together form a reactor “core.” Photo Caption Savannah River Mission Completion created a new system of remote-controlled valves to manage the flow of radioactive liquid waste into and out of the strip effluent lag storage program. The tool will also make the job of routing the waste much quicker, as the valves will be opened and closed by way of small, remote-controlled electric motors built into the valves. The unit is shown here prior to its installation in the Savannah River Site Liquid Waste Program. Photo Caption A view of the Savannah River Site's Saltstone Disposal Unit 11 under construction, with 10 of 25 wall sections, 117 of 208 columns and 14 of 14 floor sections complete. The U.S. Department of Energy awarded the Saltstone Disposal Unit 10, 11 and 12 Project Team the Project Controls Excellence Award. A view of the Savannah River Site's Saltstone Disposal Unit 11 under construction, with 10 of 25 wall sections, 117 of 208 columns and 14 of 14 floor sections complete. The U.S. Department of Energy awarded the Saltstone Disposal Unit 10, 11 and 12 Project Team the Project Controls Excellence Award. Photo Caption Energy Secretary Chris Wright addresses officials at the opening of the Advanced Manufacturing Collaborative facility in Aiken, South Carolina. The 63,000-square-foot state-of-the-art facility connects industry, academia and government to increase capabilities in areas such as additive manufacturing, artificial intelligence-driven automation, and novel materials for fusion energy and energy resilience. Energy Secretary Chris Wright addresses officials at the opening of the Advanced Manufacturing Collaborative facility in Aiken, South Carolina. The 63,000-square-foot state-of-the-art facility connects industry, academia and government to increase capabilities in areas such as additive manufacturing, artificial intelligence-driven automation, and novel materials for fusion energy and energy resilience. Photo Caption The U.S. Department of Energy Office of Environmental Management achieved preliminary cease waste removal for Tank 4 in F Tank Farm, pictured, at the Savannah River Site a year ahead of schedule. The U.S. Department of Energy Office of Environmental Management achieved preliminary cease waste removal for Tank 4 in F Tank Farm, pictured, at the Savannah River Site a year ahead of schedule. Photo Caption The canister double-stack team at Savannah River Mission Completion comprises members of the construction craft crew, engineers, radiological control inspectors, project managers and more. The team is modifying additional storage positions in a second glass waste storage building to accommodate two canisters stacked atop each other, a space-saving project that saves tens of millions of dollars. The canister double-stack team at Savannah River Mission Completion comprises members of the construction craft crew, engineers, radiological control inspectors, project managers and more. The team is modifying additional storage positions in a second glass waste storage building to accommodate two canisters stacked atop each other, a space-saving project that saves tens of millions of dollars. Photo Caption A High Flux Isotope Reactor core is lifted in an underwater storage basin at Savannah River Site. The fuel elements, an inner and an outer element, together form a reactor “core.” A High Flux Isotope Reactor core is lifted in an underwater storage basin at Savannah River Site. The fuel elements, an inner and an outer element, together form a reactor “core.” Photo Caption Savannah River Mission Completion created a new system of remote-controlled valves to manage the flow of radioactive liquid waste into and out of the strip effluent lag storage program. The tool will also make the job of routing the waste much quicker, as the valves will be opened and closed by way of small, remote-controlled electric motors built into the valves. The unit is shown here prior to its installation in the Savannah River Site Liquid Waste Program. Savannah River Mission Completion created a new system of remote-controlled valves to manage the flow of radioactive liquid waste into and out of the strip effluent lag storage program. The tool will also make the job of routing the waste much quicker, as the valves will be opened and closed by way of small, remote-controlled electric motors built into the valves. The unit is shown here prior to its installation in the Savannah River Site Liquid Waste Program. SRS News SRNL Partnership Boosts Advanced Energy and National Security Applications Savannah River National Laboratory announced a cooperative research and development agreement with the company 3D Systems to accelerate innovation in additive manufacturing for advanced energy generation and national security applications. Learn More about SRNL Partnership Boosts Advanced Energy and National Security Applications September 8, 2026 SRS Deploys Advanced Packaging for Remote-Handled Transuranic Waste Shipment The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Environmental Management successfully completed its first shipment of remote-handled transuranic radioactive waste for disposal from the Savannah River Site using new shipping packages. Learn More about SRS Deploys Advanced Packaging for Remote-Handled Transuranic Waste Shipment September 8, 2026 Weir-dly’ Enough: How a Tenth of an Inch Led to Record Production at SRS With just a tiny mechanical adjustment, the Salt Waste Processing Facility has achieved record-breaking production at the Savannah River Site. Learn More about Weir-dly’ Enough: How a Tenth of an Inch Led to Record Production at SRS September 8, 2026 SRS Recruits Sound Waves to Clean Equipment, Boosting Productivity and Safety High-frequency sound waves are helping clean components of the Salt Waste Processing Facility at Savannah River Site, delivering faster turnaround times, improved equipment performance and reduced worker exposure. Learn More about SRS Recruits Sound Waves to Clean Equipment, Boosting Productivity and Safety September 8, 2026 View More Manager Edwin Deshong, Manager Edwin Deshong assumed the role of Manager for the DOE Savannah River Operations Office on June 1, 2025. Deshong previously served as the acting director since February 2025 and was appointed as the deputy manager in December 2022. He has over 30 years of experience providing leadership and direction to federal and contractor staff responsible for the oversight and operation of nuclear facility operations within DOE-Savannah River and the National Nuclear Security Administration complex. Click here to view full bio. High-Level Budget Information FY25 Request (in the millions) FY25 Enacted (in the millions) FY26 Request (in the millions) FY26 Enacted (in the millions) FY27 Request (in the millions) $1,617 $1,819 $1,685 $1,769 $1,785 For more information on the Office of Environmental Management's budget process and performance check out the Budget & Performance page. Quick Links PROGRAM PLANNING & REVIEW Savannah River Site Savannah River National Laboratory SOCIAL MEDIA Savannah River Site Facebook Savannah River Site X Savannah River Site YouTube MAJOR CONTRACTORS Centerra Savannah River Nuclear Solutions Savannah River Mission Completion, LLC Committed to Restoring America’s Energy Dominance. Follow Us Link to Facebook Link to Instagram Link to Linkedin Link to Youtube Link to X Link to Flickr Quick Links Leadership & Offices Newsroom Contact Us Careers Resources Budget & Performance Directives, Delegations, & Requirements Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Inspector General Privacy Program Federal Government USA.gov The White House Open Gov Accessibility Privacy Information Quality No Fear Act Web Policies Vulnerability Disclosure Program Whistleblower Protection Equal Employment Opportunity Notice of Court Orders 