 Opportunity Listing - The Genesis Mission: Transforming Science and Energy with AI Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Menu Home Search About Our vision Product roadmap Community Newsletter Events Developers Public wiki Discussion forum Sign in You've been logged out. Please sign in again. The Genesis Mission: Transforming Science and Energy with AI Agency: Office of Science Assistance Listings: 81.049 -- Office of Science Financial Assistance Program Last Updated: May 13, 2026 View version history on Grants.gov Description Jump to all documents The DOE Office of Science (SC), Office of Critical Minerals and Energy Innovation (CMEI), Office of Environmental Management (EM), Office of Nuclear Energy (NE), Office of Electricity (OE), and Hydrocarbons and Geothermal Office (HGEO) hereby announce interest in receiving applications from interdisciplinary teams addressing the Genesis Mission National Science and Technology Challenges to accelerate scientific discovery and research and development (R&D) workflows using novel artificial intelligence (AI) models and frameworks. By achieving AI advantage, these teams will advance the DOE's mission and ensure America’s security and prosperity by addressing energy, environmental, and nuclear challenges through science and technology. Teams are encouraged to leverage the extensive scientific and data resources of the DOE/National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), the National Laboratories, U.S. industry, and academia. The resulting AI models and workflows, if successful, may be integrated into the American Science Cloud. ... DOE is soliciting new FY26 Phase I small team and Phase II large team applications in the following topic areas: advanced manufacturing, biotechnology, critical materials, nuclear fission, nuclear fusion, quantum information science, semiconductors and microelectronics, discovery science, and energy (see specific focus areas in Section III Program Descriptions). In addition, this RFA will remain available to allow the recipients of FY26 Phase I awards to apply for larger team Phase II awards. In a few weeks, DOE plans to amend the RFA to clarify the LOI and application guidelines for FY26 Phase II awards. In FY27, DOE plans to amend the RFA or to issue an alternative funding opportunity to update the topic and focus areas to allow a second competition of Phase I small team applications and Phase II large team applications. Show full description Eligibility Eligible applicants Miscellaneous Unrestricted Additional information Grantor contact information Description GenesisMissionNOFO@science.doe.gov Email GenesisMissionNOFO@science.doe.gov GenesisMissionNOFO@science.doe.gov Documents Download all File name Description Last updated Genesis_Mission_Phase_I_Application_Template_v2.xlsx Phase I Application Template Apr 10, 2026 01:23 PM UTC Genesis_Mission_Phase_II_LOI_Template_v2.xlsx Phase II LOI Template Apr 10, 2026 01:23 PM UTC Sample_OT_and_Project_Agreements_for_DE-FOA-0003612_REV2.pdf Sample OT and Project Agreements Jul 20, 2026 01:23 PM UTC Genesis_Mission_Phase_II_Application_Template.xlsx Phase II Application Template Apr 10, 2026 01:24 PM UTC DE-FOA-0003612.000003.pdf DE-FOA-0003612 Apr 20, 2026 09:28 PM UTC Link to additional information -- Closing: December 17, 2026 Application process This site is a work in progress. Go to www.grants.gov to apply, track application status, and subscribe to updates. View on Grants.gov Award $293,760,000 Program Funding -- Expected awards $500,000 Award Minimum $16,000,000 Award Maximum Funding opportunity number : DE-FOA-0003612 Cost sharing or matching requirement : Yes Funding instrument type : Other Opportunity Category : Discretionary Opportunity Category Explanation : -- Category of Funding Activity : Science technology and other research and development Category Explanation : -- History Version : 3 Posted date : March 17, 2026 Archive date : March 17, 2027 Your account requires additional identity verification. You must sign in with your government employee ID. Make sure you've set up your Personal Identity Verification (PIV) or Common Access Card (CAC) as a two-factor authentication method. Sign in using PIV/CAC Return to top Explore Home Search Vision Roadmap Events Subscribe Simpler.Grants.gov To give feedback, contact: simpler@grants.gov Grants.gov Support Center For technical support, contact: support@grants.gov 1-800-518-4726 Grants.gov Program Management Office Grantors, contact the PMO through your Agency Point of Contact . HHS.gov An official website of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services About HHS Accessibility support FOIA requests EEO/No Fear Act Office of the Inspector General Performance reports Privacy Policy Looking for U.S. government information and services? Visit USA.gov 