 Chemspeed | Automation and Digitalization of R&D and QC Labs Skip to main content Open main menu Portfolio Industries Workflows Company Media Service My Chemspeed Open search dialog Press Enter or Space to open search, or use keyboard shortcut Ctrl+K Automation and Digitalization of R&D and QC Labs From Manual to Smart Labs Get Started From alchemy’s past to aIlchemie’s future Chemspeed (part of bruker) empowers scientists to accelerate discovery, development, and QC with modular robotics, advanced automation, and standardized systems across the full laboratory workflow. From benchtop instruments to fully integrated, vendor‑agnostic self‑driving labs, our AI‑ready solutions streamline synthesis, sample preparation, formulation, testing, and more — improving data quality, efficiency, and productivity. Our scalable platforms seamlessly connect workflows, data, and teams, enabling reproducibility, better decisions, and a truly connected lab experience. Trusted worldwide, Chemspeed delivers integrated automation, digital solutions, application expertise, and dedicated service. Designed around your chemistry, we help advance science — from Alchemy to AlIchemie. For over 25 years, we’ve supported leading R&D and QC organizations across pharma & biotech, materials science, energy/battery, and consumer goods. Solutions at any scale Discover cutting-edge lab automation and digitalization solutions powering faster R&D and robust QC. Benchtop solutions Space-saving, high-impact Revolutionary, compact solutions for gravimetric solid dispensing. Perfect for space-conscious laboratories. Dive Deeper → Configurable solutions Tailored for your workflow Custom solutions built to fit your specific laboratory requirements and workflow needs. Read More → QC packages Where accuracy meets compliance Ensure accuracy, consistency, and compliance at every stage with Chemspeed's QC packages. Learn More → data_exploration Applications & workflows Real results, multiple industries Explore proven solutions delivered to customers worldwide across multiple industries. See Solutions In Action → computer Software Connect. Control. Analyze. Seamlessly connect, control, and analyze with our intuitive software suite. From experiment design to data management. View Features → Here when you need us Service & support Your success is our priority. Expert support from installation to optimization. Get Support Explore our featured solutions Solutions that stand out. Learn more Precision Liquid Sample Prep for NMR Precision liquid sample preparation with Chemspeed delivers fully automated, accurate, and reproducible sample handling for high‑field NMR analysis Learn more Learn more High‑Throughput Solid Sample Prep for NMR & LC/MS High‑throughput solid sample preparation with Chemspeed ensures fast, reproducible, and fully automated delivery of perfectly prepared NMR and LC/MS samples Learn more Learn more Automated Synthesis, Sampling & Online Benchtop NMR Discover how Chemspeed's (a Bruker company) automated synthesis workstation FLEX ISYNTH connects with Bruker's Fourier 80 online NMR analysis. Learn more Learn more Automated Process & Chemical R&D with Online NMR Quality by design (QbD), proven accetable range (PAR) driven high-output process R&D / chemical development, preparative synthesis, work-up, and analysis with online / offline benchtop NMR Learn more Learn more End-to-End Automated "Make" and IR Spectroscopy Workflows Chemspeed workstations automatically prepare, process, and deliver samples to Bruker Optics FT‑IR (NIR, MIR) systems. This closes the loop between "make" and analysis—eliminating manual steps altogether. Learn more Learn more End-to-End "Make" and Multi-Modality Raman Spectroscopy & NMR Automation Seamlessly integrate Raman spectroscopy and NMR into automated laboratory workflows for e.g. analytical sample preparation, synthesis, process research, formulation. Our advanced automation solutions enable reproducible measurements, higher throughput, and consistent data quality—from research to routine analysis. Learn more Learn more End-to-End "Make" and Multi-Modality Raman Spectroscopy & XRD Automation Advanced automation combining Raman spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) enables efficient, reproducible analysis of solid-state properties. These automated workflows reduce manual handling, increase throughput, and deliver consistent, high-quality data across research and routine applications. Learn more Slide 1 Slide 2 Slide 3 Slide 4 Slide 5 Slide 6 Slide 7 Precision Liquid Sample Prep for NMR Precision liquid sample preparation with Chemspeed delivers fully automated, accurate, and reproducible sample handling for high‑field NMR analysis Learn more High‑Throughput Solid Sample Prep for NMR & LC/MS High‑throughput solid sample preparation with Chemspeed ensures fast, reproducible, and fully automated delivery of perfectly prepared NMR and LC/MS samples Automated Synthesis, Sampling & Online Benchtop NMR Discover how Chemspeed's (a Bruker company) automated synthesis workstation FLEX ISYNTH connects with Bruker's Fourier 80 online NMR analysis. Automated Process & Chemical R&D with Online NMR Quality by design (QbD), proven accetable range (PAR) driven high-output process R&D / chemical development, preparative synthesis, work-up, and analysis with online / offline benchtop NMR End-to-End Automated "Make" and IR Spectroscopy Workflows Chemspeed workstations automatically prepare, process, and deliver samples to Bruker Optics FT‑IR (NIR, MIR) systems. This closes the loop between "make" and analysis—eliminating manual steps altogether. End-to-End "Make" and Multi-Modality Raman Spectroscopy & NMR Automation Seamlessly integrate Raman spectroscopy and NMR into automated laboratory workflows for e.g. analytical sample preparation, synthesis, process research, formulation. Our advanced automation solutions enable reproducible measurements, higher throughput, and consistent data quality—from research to routine analysis. End-to-End "Make" and Multi-Modality Raman Spectroscopy & XRD Automation Advanced automation combining Raman spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) enables efficient, reproducible analysis of solid-state properties. These automated workflows reduce manual handling, increase throughput, and deliver consistent, high-quality data across research and routine applications. Learn more Learn more Learn more Learn more Learn more Learn more Learn more We were thrilled to welcome a team from Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany to Chemspeed. During their visit, they shared fantastic feedback about their experience with the CRYSTAL POWDERDOSE platform: "They expressed the team's love for the CRYSTAL POWDERDOSE, while confirming their ROI for this investment was within 4 months." Quote Merck KGaA Customer achievements Showcasing research powered by our solutions. Mapping the crystallization landscape of rare earth MOFs. How automation turned trial-and-error into a map. 01.09.2026 Read More AI designs it. Robots build It. Humans decide. Inside Astellas' human-in-the-loop drug discovery. 18.08.2026 Read More Self-Driving Labs Are Rewriting the Clock on Discovery 04.08.2026 Read More Get to know us Meet the people, purpose, and possibilities behind Chemspeed. About us <p>Learn who we are and how we're advancing lab automation worldwide.</p> Careers Explore opportunities to grow your career with Chemspeed. Global Network Discover our worldwide presence and local support capabilities. Start Your Journey With Chemspeed From innovation to quality, Chemspeed delivers automation & digitalization that grows with your lab. Explore Our Portfolio Browse Our Example Solutions Contact Us Chemspeed is a global team committed to enable automated and digitalized workflows for scientists in R&D and QC. Linkedin Instagram X YouTube Company About Chemspeed Contact Chemspeed Careers Legal Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions of Sales Terms & Conditions of Purchasing Terms & Conditions of Service Social Responsibility Report © Chemspeed (part of Bruker) 2026 