 NSF announces $83M investment in integrated data systems and services to advance AI-driven science and strengthen U.S. research infrastructure | NSF - U.S. National Science Foundation Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS. A lock ( Lock Locked padlock ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Menu Search search Find Funding Funding Search Award Search NSF-wide Initiatives Research Experiences for Undergraduates Where to Start For Everyone For Early-Career Researchers For Postdoctoral Fellows For Graduate Students For Undergraduates For Industry For Entrepreneurs How to Apply Preparing Your Proposal Submitting Your Proposal Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) Additional Resources Research.gov Grants.gov How We Make Funding Decisions Manage Your Award Getting Started Request a Change to Your Award Report Your Outcomes Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) Additional Resources Research.gov NSF Public Access Repository Who to Contact With Questions Focus Areas Major Initiatives Artificial Intelligence Biotechnology Quantum STEM Workforce Focus Areas Explore All Focus Areas Arctic and Antarctic Astronomy and Space Biology Chemistry Computing Earth and Environment Education and Training Engineering Facilities and Infrastructure Materials Research Mathematics People and Society Physics Research Partnerships Technology News & Events News & Announcements NSF Impacts Science Matters Blog For the Press Upcoming Events About About NSF Careers at NSF Updates on NSF Priorities Contact Us Our Directorates & Offices How NSF Is Organized Biological Sciences (BIO) Computer & Information Science & Engineering (CISE) Engineering (ENG) Geosciences (GEO) Integrative Activities (OIA) International Science & Engineering (OISE) Mathematical & Physical Sciences (MPS) Social, Behavioral & Economic Sciences (SBE) STEM Education (EDU) Technology, Innovation & Partnerships (TIP) National Center for Science & Engineering Statistics (NCSES) National Science Board (NSB) Home News NSF announces $83M investment in integrated data systems and services to advance AI-driven science and strengthen U.S. research infrastructure Print this Page View image credit NSF News NSF announces $83M investment in integrated data systems and services to advance AI-driven science and strengthen U.S. research infrastructure July 22, 2026 The U.S. National Science Foundation today announced $83 million in awards through the Integrated Data Systems and Services (IDSS) program . The awards will expand access to data infrastructure resources that researchers can use alongside computing and artificial intelligence resources to accelerate scientific discovery and innovation. IDSS supports national priorities to strengthen U.S. leadership in AI, build an AI-ready workforce and ensure researchers have the tools and infrastructure needed to compete globally. The program advances a national AI research ecosystem by connecting scientific data with computing, instruments, software and AI resources, complementing the NSF-led National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource (NAIRR) and other cyberinfrastructure investments. These investments also support the White House's Genesis Mission by strengthening the data infrastructure that enables researchers to make discoveries, use AI and advanced computing and accelerate innovation across the U.S. research enterprise. "America's leadership in artificial intelligence depends not only on advanced computing resources but also on the data infrastructure that enables researchers to discover, access, share and analyze scientific data at scale," said Brian Stone, performing the duties of the NSF director. "These investments provide foundational capabilities that empower scientists and engineers to drive transformative AI-enabled discovery, accelerate innovation and strengthen national competitiveness." The IDSS program invests in national-scale data systems that advance data-intensive and AI-driven science, engineering research, innovation and education. Because data is essential for scientific discovery, these investments will improve how scientific data is collected, stored, shared and analyzed across NSF facilities, research centers and national laboratories. The awards also connect data systems, AI models and computing resources so they work together more effectively, while creating shared platforms that make it easier for researchers to find, use and reuse data across different projects and fields. In addition, they provide access to AI tools and advanced computing systems that help researchers use AI more effectively in their work. Collectively, these investments will enable scientists to focus on generating new insights from data rather than managing underlying infrastructure. The IDSS awards and project descriptions are provided below. Category I: National-Scale Integrated Data Systems and Services Fabric for AI-Driven Science (FabAID) , led by the Morgridge Institute for Research in Madison, Wisconsin, will build a national data fabric that connects repositories, computing resources and cyberinfrastructure, including NAIRR, to streamline access and curation of large-scale scientific datasets for AI-driven research. National Data Platform (NDP) , led by UC San Diego, will create an AI-ready ecosystem that integrates distributed data, computing facilities and AI resources across the U.S. to support interoperable, scalable and reproducible AI-driven scientific workflows. Category II: Transition to National-Scale Operations Interactive Discovery Laboratory (iDLab) , led by UCLA, will provide a unified web-based platform that connects researchers to computing and data resources across NSF-supported high-performance computing sites and cloud systems, enabling streamlined workflows for AI-enabled research and expanding STEM education and training through browser-based environments. BRIDGE National Center , led by the University of California, Irvine, will deliver an open, cloud-based infrastructure for reusable data science workflows, datasets and machine learning models to improve reproducibility and accelerate AI-driven discovery. National Science Data Fabric (NSDF) , led by The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, will transition a pilot into a national service that connects researchers to distributed scientific data through standardized frameworks that make data easier to find, access, and reuse. It will enable secure and reproducible workflows and support workforce development programs in data science and AI. Multidisciplinary Environment for Scientific Advancement (MESA) , led by The University of Arizona, will develop an AI-driven data platform that uses metadata automation and intelligent agents to connect and organize scientific data across disciplines, enabling interoperable and reproducible AI workflows. In addition, several planning grants were awarded to support the development of future data infrastructure proposals under Category I and II. The IDSS program strengthens the national research data infrastructure by improving access to scientific data and enabling its more effective use in combination with AI and computing resources. By making scientific data more accessible and actionable, these investments are expected to accelerate scientific discovery, advance innovation and expand AI-enabled research capabilities, helping translate federally supported research into benefits for the American public. Learn more about the IDSS program . Research areas Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Share Share on Facebook Share on X (formerly known as Twitter) Share on LinkedIn Email Related stories NSF launches three new Science and Technology Centers with $90M investment in transformative research Eight NSF research institutes to propel U.S. quantum science with $290M investment NSF announces $1.5B for foundational research to drive scientific breakthroughs for American technological leadership Top Publication date: July 22, 2026 Last updated: July 23, 2026 Randolph Building 401 Dulany Street Alexandria, VA 22314 (703) 292-5111 Sign up for email updates Footer About Us About NSF Careers Our Directorates & Offices National Science Board Contact Us What's New News & Announcements Events Science Matters Blog Information For Funding Seekers NSF Awardees Congress Media Educators Panelists Resources Documents & Reports Budget, Performance & Financial Reporting Public Access Stopping Harassment Research Security Scientific Integrity Research.gov Required Policy Links Vulnerability disclosure Inspector General Privacy FOIA No FEAR Act USA.gov Accessibility Plain language 