 Accelerating the Genesis Mission with Gemini for Government | Google Cloud Blog Jump to Content Cloud Blog Contact sales Get started for free Cloud Blog Solutions & technology AI & Machine Learning API Management Application Development Application Modernization Chrome Enterprise Compute Containers & Kubernetes Data Analytics Databases DevOps & SRE Maps & Geospatial Security Security & Identity Threat Intelligence Infrastructure Infrastructure Modernization Networking Productivity & Collaboration SAP on Google Cloud Storage & Data Transfer Sustainability Ecosystem IT Leaders Industries Financial Services Healthcare & Life Sciences Manufacturing Media & Entertainment Public Sector Retail Supply Chain Telecommunications Partners Startups & SMB Training & Certifications Inside Google Cloud Google Cloud Next & Events Google Cloud Consulting Google Maps Platform Google Workspace Developers & Practitioners Transform with Google Cloud Contact sales Get started for free Public Sector How Google Public Sector and Google DeepMind can power the Genesis Mission and a new era of scientific discovery December 19, 2025 Jim Kelly Vice President, Federal, Google Public Sector Ali Douraghy Head of AI Cloud for Federal Science, Google Public Sector Google Public Sector Newsletter Essential public sector updates with Google Cloud insights. Subscribe The White House's Genesis Mission has set a bold ambition for our nation: to double our scientific productivity within the decade and harness artificial intelligence (AI) to accelerate the pace of discovery. This requires a profound transformation in our national scientific enterprise, one that seamlessly integrates high-performance computing, world-class experimental facilities, and AI. The challenge is no longer generating exabytes of exquisite data from experiments and simulations, but rather curating and exploring it using AI to accelerate the discoveries hidden within. Through our Genesis Mission partnership with the Department of Energy (DOE), Google is committed to powering this new era of federally-funded scientific discovery with the necessary tools and platforms. State-of-the-art reasoning for science The National Labs can take advantage of Gemini for Government —a secure platform with an accredited interface that provides scaled access to a new class of agentic tools designed to augment the scientific process. This includes access to the full capabilities of Gemini , our most powerful and general-purpose AI model. Its native multimodal reasoning operates across the diverse data types of modern science. This means researchers can ask questions in natural language to generate insights grounded in selected sources—from technical reports, code, and images, to a library of enterprise applications, and even organizational and scientific datasets. In addition to the Gemini for Government platform, the National Labs will have access to several Google technologies that support their mission. Today, Google DeepMind announced an accelerated access program for all 17 National Labs, beginning with AI co-scientist —a multi-agent virtual collaborator built on Gemini that can accelerate hypothesis development from years to days—with plans to expand to other frontier AI tools in 2026. Google Cloud provides the secure foundation to bring these innovations to the public sector. By making these capabilities commercially available through our cloud infrastructure, we are ensuring that the latest frontier AI models and tools from Google DeepMind are accessible for the mission-critical work of our National Labs. Accelerating the research cycle with autonomous workflows Gemini for Government brings together the best of Google accredited cloud services, industry-leading Gemini models, and agentic solutions. The platform is engineered to enable autonomous workflows that orchestrate complex tasks. A prime example is Deep Research, which can traverse decades of scientific literature and experimental databases to identify previously unseen connections across different research initiatives or flag contradictory findings that warrant new investigation. By automating complex computational tasks, like managing large-scale simulation ensembles or orchestrating analysis pipelines across hybrid cloud resources, scientists can dramatically accelerate the ‘design-build-test-learn’ cycle, freeing up valuable time for the creative thinking that drives scientific breakthroughs. To ensure agencies can easily leverage these advanced capabilities—including the DOE and its National Laboratories—Gemini for Government is available under the same standard terms and pricing already established for all federal agencies through the General Services Administration's OneGov Strategy . This streamlined access enables National Labs to quickly deploy an AI-powered backbone for their most complex, multi-lab research initiatives. A secure fabric for big team science The future of AI-enabled research requires interconnected experimental facilities, data repositories, and computing infrastructure stewarded by the National Labs. Gemini for Government provides a secure, federated foundation required to reimagine "Big Team Science," creating a seamless fabric connecting the entire DOE complex. AI models and tools in this integrated environment empower researchers to weave together disparate datasets from the field to the benchtop, and combine observations with models, revealing more insights across vast temporal and spatial scales. Ultimately, this transformation can change the nature of discovery, creating a frictionless environment where AI manages complex workflows, uncovers hidden insights, and acts as a true creative research partner to those at our National Labs. Learn more about Gemini for Government by registering for Google Public Sector Summit On-Demand . Ready to discuss how Gemini for Government can address your organization’s needs? Please reach out to our Google Public Sector team at geminiforgov@google.com. Posted in Public Sector Related articles Security & Identity Cloud CISO Perspectives: Tips on securing the water sector in the AI era By Chris Sistrunk • 9-minute read Public Sector Modernizing the skies: NOAA and Google Cloud collaborate to advance weather forecasting By Brent Mitchell • 2-minute read Public Sector Accelerating the frontiers of scientific discovery: Google’s $40M commitment to the Genesis Mission By Pushmeet Kohli • 3-minute read Public Sector Key findings from the 2026 Public Sector M-Trends report and beyond By Fernando Tomlinson Jr. • 4-minute read Footer Links Follow us Google Cloud Google Cloud Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls Help Language ‪English‬ ‪Deutsch‬ ‪Français‬ ‪한국어‬ ‪日本語‬ 