 Oracle and the U.S. Department of Energy Collaborate to Accelerate AI Initiatives Skip to content Accessibility Policy Menu QUICK LINKS Cloud Database Java AI SUGGESTED LINKS SUGGESTED SEARCHES Country Back Cloud Account Sign in to Cloud Sign Up for Free Cloud Tier Oracle Account Sign-In Create an Account Help Sign Out Oracle News Press Release Oracle and the U.S. Department of Energy Collaborate to Accelerate AI Initiatives Austin, Texas—Dec 18, 2025 Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Oracle and the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) today announced a joint effort to further advance the DOE’s current and future AI and advanced computing initiatives, including the Genesis Mission . As part of a non-binding agreement, Oracle and the DOE will work together to foster technological innovation, accelerate the deployment of next-generation AI capabilities, and help strengthen domestic capacity in key areas such as compute infrastructure, data architecture, and responsible AI development. The Genesis Mission is a dedicated, coordinated national effort to unleash a new age of AI accelerated innovation and scientific discovery. The goal is to develop an integrated platform that connects the world's best supercomputers, experimental facilities, AI systems, and unique datasets across every major scientific domain to double the productivity and impact of American research and innovation within a decade. “Participating in today’s Genesis Mission event at the White House affirms our shared commitment to progressing America’s leadership in AI and high-performance computing,” said Kim Lynch, executive vice president, Oracle Government, Defense & Intelligence. “Oracle remains dedicated to equipping federal agencies with industry-leading cloud infrastructure solutions that drive innovation and underpin the future of U.S. technological progress.” Contact Info Katie Barron Oracle Corporate Communications katie.barron@oracle.com +202-904-1138 About Oracle Oracle offers integrated suites of applications plus secure, autonomous infrastructure in the Oracle Cloud. For more information about Oracle (NYSE: ORCL), please visit us at www.oracle.com . Trademarks Oracle, Java, MySQL, and NetSuite are registered trademarks of Oracle Corporation. NetSuite was the first cloud company—ushering in the new era of cloud computing. © 2026 Oracle Privacy / Do Not Sell My Info Ad Choices Careers Subscribe to emails Integrity Helpline Contact Us Facebook X LinkedIn YouTube 