 AWS announces up to $100 million in federal credits to accelerate innovation for national security and scientific missions | AWS Public Sector Blog Skip to Main Content Filter: All English Contact us AWS Marketplace Support My account re:Invent Discover AWS Products Solutions Pricing Resources Search Filter: All Sign in to console Create account Explore topics Event Register now for AWS re:Invent 2026 Data Migration On-prem databases weren't built for agentic AI. Amazon RDS is Independent Software Vendors AI for software & tech: build, scale, and monetize AI for Small Businesses Solutions designed for your business. Delivered by AWS Partners Artificial Intelligence (AI) Accelerate AI from experimentation to production with AWS AI agents AgentCore: One platform to build, connect and optimize agents News & announcements AWS blog About AWS AWS is the world's most comprehensive cloud, enabling organizations to accelerate innovation, reduce costs, and scale more efficiently Why AWS Getting Started Security Compliance Trust Center Sustainability Global Infrastructure Featured Products Analytics Application Integration Artificial Intelligence Business Applications Compute Customer Experience Databases Developer Tools End User Computing Game Tech Management Tools Media Services Migration & Modernization Multicloud & Hybrid Networking & Content Delivery Operations Security & Identity Storage Supply Chain Browse all products Featured Products Get started with one of these featured services or browse all Browse all products Amazon Quick AI-powered assistant for work with research, business insights, automation, and no-code app building Transform Eliminate tech debt with agentic AI to modernize legacy systems and code Aurora Serverless relational database service for PostgreSQL, MySQL, and DSQL Amazon Bedrock The end-to-end platform for building generative AI applications and agents Amazon Connect Customer AI-native solution for delivering exceptional experiences across customer interactions EC2 Secure and resizable compute capacity for virtually any workload Nova Foundation models delivering frontier intelligence and top price performance OpenSearch Service Real-time search, observability, and security analytics S3 Virtually unlimited secure object storage for AI, analytics, and archives What’s new Explore new capabilities and the latest technologies Customer success stories Learn how customers around the world accelerate their cloud By industry By organization type Solutions Library Industry solutions on AWS Transform your industry with AWS cloud solutions. Access proven architectures, compliance guides, and success stories of customers using AWS products tailored to your sector. Explore AWS solutions for your industry. Go to industry hub Advertising and Marketing Turn data into customer-winning campaigns Aerospace and Satellite Cloud solutions to help customers build satellites, conduct space and launch operations, and reimagine space exploration Automotive Build smarter vehicles and transform mobility with cloud solutions Education Solutions to help facilitate teaching, learning, student engagement, better learning outcomes and modernize IT operations Energy and Utilities Revamp legacy operations and accelerate the development of innovative renewable energy business models Financial Services Develop innovative and secure solutions across banking, capital markets, insurance, and payments Games Enable game development for every genre and platform, from AAA titles to indie studios Government Solutions designed to help government agencies modernize, meet mandates, reduce costs, and deliver mission outcomes Healthcare and Life Sciences Accelerate innovation and improve patient care with healthcare data management and security Industrial Services and solutions for customers across Manufacturing, Automotive, Energy, Power & Utilities, Transportation & Logistics Manufacturing Optimize production and speed time-to-market Media and Entertainment Transform media & entertainment with the most purpose-built capabilities and partner solutions of any cloud Nonprofit Cloud solutions to help nonprofits and NGOs maximize their mission impact and donor relationships Retail and Consumer Goods Empower brands to drive market differentiation and growth with cloud solutions Semiconductor Design and deliver next-generation chip solutions with cloud technology Sports Fuel innovative fan, broadcast, and athlete experiences Sustainability Tools and resources to help organizations achieve their sustainability goals with AWS Telecommunications Accelerate innovation, scale with confidence, and add agility with cloud-based telecom solutions Travel and Hospitality Elevate travel and hospitality with solutions that boost customer experiences and operational efficiency What's new Explore new capabilities and the latest technologies Customer success stories Learn how customers around the world accelerate their cloud Pricing overview & tools AWS Pricing Learn about pricing and plans in one place AWS Pricing Calculator Estimate the cost for your architecture solution AWS Free Tier Get free, hands-on experience with AWS products and services AWS Offers Explore different offer programs to gain hands-on experience AWS Savings Plans Flexible pricing model offering lower prices Single-product pricing Amazon S3 Amazon Bedrock Amazon RDS Amazon EC2 Amazon SageMaker Browse all product pricing Learn Documentation Get detailed technical guides and references for all AWS services and tools Training & Certification Build and validate your AWS cloud skills and technical expertise Cloud term glossary Learn more about key cloud computing concepts Whitepapers Expand your knowledge of the cloud with expert guides and diagrams Cloud fundamentals Step-by-step instructions for common AWS tasks Tutorials Get started with step-by-step instructions Connect & Support Builder Center Learn, build, and connect with builders in the AWS community Events and webinars Connect, collaborate, and learn from AWS experts in the cloud computing community Partner Network Collaborate with AWS partners to grow your business Marketplace Find, test, buy, and deploy third-party software Support Access proactive guidance, issue resolution, and helpful tools Professional services Accelerate business transformation with expert guidance and packaged solutions AWS Blogs Home Blogs Editions AWS Public Sector Blog AWS announces up to $100 million in federal credits to accelerate innovation for national security and scientific missions by David Appel on 17 FEB 2026 in Announcements , Defense , Government , Public Sector Permalink Share Today, Amazon Web Services (AWS) announced two federal credit programs totaling up to $100 million to accelerate innovation in support of America’s most critical national security and scientific missions. The AWS Warfighter Capability Accelerator Initiative and AWS Genesis Accelerator Initiative will each provide up to $50 million in AWS credits over three years (2026-2028) to help federal agencies, national laboratories, and their supporting organizations rapidly develop and deploy advanced capabilities using AWS cloud services and generative AI technologies. The AWS Warfighter Capability Accelerator and Genesis Mission Accelerator initiatives provide up to $100M in credits to remove financial barriers that prevent organizations from operating at the speed required for national security and scientific leadership, compressing innovation timelines from years to months. Together, these programs reflect the leading role of AWS as a cloud partner for the U.S. federal government, providing solutions for challenges that limit innovation and the ready-today tools for those working on the next big breakthrough. AWS Warfighter Capability Accelerator Initiative The AWS Warfighter Capability Accelerator Initiative provides up to $50 million in AWS credits to the U.S. Department of War (DoW), defense industrial base, and defense contractors. The program will provide credits for mission uses such as AI and autonomous systems, AI-enabled battle management and decision support for Combatant Commands, homeland defense, advanced manufacturing and shipbuilding, contested logistics, priority critical cybersecurity, and space-based systems. “We are excited to pursue multiple pathways and initiatives that invest in the technologies and solutions that directly address Department of War’s most pressing, real-world challenges.” – David Fitzgerald, Deputy Under Secretary of the Army. Eligible participants include all DoW entities, defense industrial base organizations such as manufacturing facilities and research institutions, and defense contractors ranging from prime contractors to start-ups. The Warfighter Capability Accelerator Initiative supports Secretary Hegseth’s Arsenal of Freedom vision, along with the 2026 National Defense Strategy , and AI Acceleration Strategy , so the Department of War can deliver advanced capabilities at wartime speed. The programs also enable President Trump’s Executive Order on modernizing defense acquisitions by encouraging speed, flexibility, and innovation in the defense industrial base. AWS Genesis Accelerator Initiative The AWS Genesis Accelerator Initiative provides up to $50 million in AWS credits to support AI-powered scientific breakthroughs across priority domains including biotechnology, nuclear fission and fusion energy, supercomputing and quantum information science. This program will enable work by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), including the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), all associated national laboratories, federal research organizations, and private sector organizations. The AWS Initiative is named after the Genesis Mission : an Executive Order 14363 launched in November 2025 with the goal of harnessing AI-accelerated innovation to double the productivity and impact of American research within a decade. AWS has supported the Genesis Mission since day one, collaborating with Idaho National Lab on digital twins. The credit program continues our work building the foundations for generations of American scientific leadership. Program Benefits and Resources In both programs, participants can receive: Cloud computing credits : Up to $50 million per program to access AWS cloud technology; Training programs : Training curricula covering cloud technologies, AI/ML, and modern software development practices; and Technical expertise : Direct access to AWS solution architects and AI specialists for guidance and support. Both programs support workloads across all classification levels, from unclassified (FedRAMP High) to Top Secret/SCI, ensuring secure innovation for the most sensitive missions. Agencies interested in receiving credits can visit the Initiative Portal and complete the interest form. AWS will schedule a consultation and work with participants to develop project proposals aligned with DoW and DOE innovation priorities. Post-award credits will be applied to existing contracts, and participants can begin building. Commitment to Public Sector customers AWS is unwaveringly committed to public sector customers in the federal, defense, and intelligence communities, and today supports more than 11,000 government agencies across the globe. AWS brings nearly a decade of experience supporting some the U.S. government’s most sensitive workloads and breaking barriers for our customers. AWS was the first cloud provider to build infrastructure specifically for government (2011), support classified workloads (2014), and achieve accreditation across all US government data classifications (2017). One example is the support we’ve extended for our government customers in the past six months alone. In August, the U.S. General Services Administration announced a OneGov Agreement with AWS to provide up to $1 billion in savings for cloud adoption, modernization, and training for federal agencies through 2028. In October, AWS launched a second Secret Cloud Region, AWS Secret-West, further expanding classified computing capabilities. In November, Amazon announced it will invest up to $50 billion to expand AI and supercomputing infrastructure for U.S. government agencies. Learn more about the Accelerator Initiatives and how to participate. David Appel David leads the AWS Global Government, National Security, and Defense business. He and his team help customers realize the potential of technology to transform their organizations and fulfill their missions. In this role, he works closely with customers on their cloud adoption journey to leverage the most advanced technologies, delivering improved capability with efficiency and speed of relevance to the end user. David has a breadth of experience in program leadership, business operations, finance, business development, and strategic planning. Resources AWS in the Public Sector AWS for Government AWS for Education AWS for Nonprofits AWS for Public Sector Health AWS for Aerospace and Satellite Solutions Case Studies Fix This Podcast Additional Resources Contact Us Follow AWS for Government Twitter AWS Education Twitter AWS Nonprofits Twitter Newsletter Subscription Create an AWS account Learn What Is AWS? What Is Cloud Computing? What Is Agentic AI? Cloud Computing Concepts Hub AWS Cloud Security What's New Blogs Press Releases Resources Getting Started Training AWS Trust Center AWS Solutions Library Architecture Center Product and Technical FAQs Analyst Reports AWS Partners Developers Builder Center SDKs & Tools .NET on AWS Python on AWS Java on AWS PHP on AWS JavaScript on AWS Help Contact Us File a Support Ticket AWS re:Post Knowledge Center AWS Support Overview Get Expert Help AWS Accessibility Legal English Back to top Amazon is an Equal Opportunity Employer: Minority / Women / Disability / Veteran / Gender Identity / Sexual Orientation / Age. x facebook linkedin instagram twitch youtube podcasts email Privacy Site terms Cookie Preferences © 2026, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates. All rights reserved. 