 Cornelis | Unlock AI & HPC Performance with Zero-Congestion Networking Skip to content Cornelis Networks Toggle Navigation Solutions Arrow - Right High Performance Computing Arrow - Right Get HPC solutions built for the toughest workloads with ultra-low tail latency. Artificial Intelligence Arrow - Right Designed for AI and large-scale computing, CN5000 Omni-Path delivers faster models, real-time inference, and higher ROI. Products Arrow - Right CN6000 Arrow - Right The first 800G multi-protocol SuperNIC, delivering industry-leading AI and HPC performance with Omni-Path, RoCEv2, and Ultra Ethernet on PCIe 6.0. SuperNICs Switches CN5000 Arrow - Right The first lossless, congestion-free scale-out network—delivering faster training and lower inference latency than today's alternatives. Overview SuperNICs Switches Director Class Switches Cables Software Omni-Path 100 Arrow - Right Cornelis enables HPC solutions for the world’s toughest challenges with Omni-Path Express, delivering low latency and high message rates for peak performance and scalability. Overview SuperNICs Switches Director Class Switches Cables Software Partners Resources Arrow - Right Blog Arrow - Right Read how Cornelis accelerates breakthroughs with high-performance HPC and AI solutions. White Papers Arrow - Right Read white papers on how Cornelis products demonstrate high-performance, low-latency interconnects for scalable HPC and AI. Case Studies Arrow - Right See how Cornelis solutions drive real-world results in HPC and AI through customer success stories and case studies. Online User Guides External Explore the setup and functionality of Cornelis products through technical documentation and manuals. Support Arrow - Right Software Downloads External Get access to Cornelis' latest software and product documentation. Technical Training External Cornelis Networks offers a broad range of technical training materials. Contact us for more information. Customer Support External For prompt, expert assistance with technical issues or questions, our Customer Support team is here to ensure your Cornelis Networks products run smoothly and efficiently. Company Arrow - Right About Arrow - Right We build the networks AI and HPC workloads can't wait for –– faster, scalable, and above all open. Leadership Arrow - Right Meet our Executives. Newsroom Arrow - Right Discover our latest news, announcements, and expert insights. Media Kit Arrow - Right Explore our media kit for insights, visuals, and resources that highlight how Cornelis accelerates AI and HPC innovation. Events Arrow - Right Connect with us at upcoming HPC & AI events. Careers Arrow - Right Seeking top talent to solve the world's toughest challenges. Search Contact Arrow - Right TACC Supercharges Stampede3 with Cornelis CN5000 Upgrade NSF-approved deployment upgrades 600+ compute nodes and boosts scientific computing performance by up to 71%. Read More Arrow - Right Two Bottlenecks. One Optimized Solution. Congestion-free networking and adaptive compute accelerate AI and HPC performance. Read More Arrow - Right Cornelis and x Fusion Deliver High-Performance Infrastructure for European Automotive and Industrial HPC Read More Arrow - Right Toggle slider playback The World's First Lossless and Congestion-Free Scale-Out Network Cornelis is solving one of the world’s biggest compute efficiency challenges - unlocking application performance with network-led acceleration at any scale. From faster AI training and ultra-responsive inference to the most predictable, high-throughput HPC simulations, Cornelis delivers results where legacy networks fall short. Built on the proven Omni-Path architecture, our solutions provide maximum performance, efficiency, scalability, resiliency and interoperability - empowering the next generation of AI and HPC infrastructure. Introducing the CN5000 Omni-Path End-to-End Network 400G SuperNIC Complete 400G Switch Portfolio 48-Port Switch Up to 576-Port Director Switch Switch"> Director Switch"> Optimized Open-Source Host and Management Software Delivering Industry-Leading HPC Performance >2X Higher Message Rates 35% Lower Latency 30% Higher Application Performance Revolutionizing AI Performance - 6X Faster AI Collectives Communication Performance >30% Higher HPC Performance >2X Higher Bandwidth on AI Sync Messages 500K+ Endpoint Scale Talk To An Expert Arrow - Right Message Rate, Latency, and HPC claims based on CN5000 relative to NDR 400G AI Collectives Performance claim based on internal simulations vs 400G Ethernet Why Cornelis Networks? Highest Performance Credit Based Flow Control, Dynamic Adaptive Routing, Enhanced Congestion Control Reduced Checkpointing AI & HPC at Scale Near-linear Training Performance Unlocks advanced inference with extended reasoning Seamless Integration, Universal Interoperability Universally interoperable with all leading GPUs, CPUs, and accelerators BYOP (Bring your own platform) Enhanced Resiliency Ensuring Uptime Even During Failures No Error-Driven Retries Boost Datacenter Efficiency No Packet Drops Optimal Path Selection Prevent Congestion Trees Greater power availability to GPUs, sustaining workloads at peak efficiency Making Your Network Work Smarter—Together We have network experts ready to help you make the most of your infrastructure. Plan your network, optimize your current infrastructure, ask questions, or get support. We are here to make it easy. Accelerate Enterprise AI Applications From training large language models and powering agentic AI frameworks, to real-time fraud detection in finance and computer vision in autonomous systems - CN5000 Omni-Path AI solutions deliver the high-performance, lossless networking foundation that next-generation AI demands. Explore AI Solutions Arrow - Right HPC Networks, Redefined Push the boundaries of scientific discovery and engineering innovation with CN5000 Omni-Path-based HPC solutions. From advancing climate modeling and seismic analysis, to accelerating simulation and design in aerospace and automotive, and enabling complex genomic research in life sciences, CN5000 Omni-Path solutions power breakthrough results—faster, smarter, and at scale. Explore HPC Solutions Arrow - Right Experience Optimized AI Today! Talk To An Expert Arrow - Right Latest News August 19th, 2026 Cornelis and NEC Corporation Expand Collaboration to Advance AI and HPC Infrastructure in Japan READ MORE Arrow - Right July 21st, 2026 Cornelis Announces New Reference Architecture for AI Inference, Training, and HPC Built for AMD 6th Gen EPYC ™ and AMD Instinct ™ MI400 Series READ MORE Arrow - Right June 26th, 2026 Cornelis CN5000 Powers LLNL/NNSA CTS-2 "Lynx" Supercomputer READ MORE External The Network AI Has Been Waiting For Products CN5000 Omni-Path ® Omni-Path 100 Resources Blog White Papers Case Studies Online User Guides External Company Careers Events Newsroom Support Software Downloads External Technical Training External Customer Support External LinkedIn YouTube Copyright 2026 Cornelis Networks. All Rights Reserved. Privacy Policy 