 Government Accelerator Initiatives Skip to main content Filter: All English Contact us AWS Marketplace Support My account re:Invent Discover AWS Products Solutions Pricing Resources Search Filter: All Sign in to console Create account Explore topics re:Invent 2026 The session catalog is live. Explore what's waiting for you Customer Stories See how customers innovate with AWS data & AI Independent Software Vendors AI for software & tech: build, scale, and monetize AI for Small Businesses Solutions designed for your business. Delivered by AWS Partners Agent Toolkit Give AI coding agents up-to-date docs and AWS resource access Amazon Quick Answers grounded in your actual business data News & announcements AWS blog About AWS AWS is the world's most comprehensive cloud, enabling organizations to accelerate innovation, reduce costs, and scale more efficiently Why AWS Getting Started Security Compliance Trust Center Sustainability Global Infrastructure Featured Products Analytics Application Integration Artificial Intelligence Business Applications Compute Customer Experience Databases Developer Tools End User Computing Game Tech Management Tools Media Services Migration & Modernization Multicloud & Hybrid Networking & Content Delivery Operations Security & Identity Storage Supply Chain Browse all products Featured Products Get started with one of these featured services or browse all Browse all products Amazon Quick AI-powered assistant for work with research, business insights, automation, and no-code app building Transform Eliminate tech debt with agentic AI to modernize legacy systems and code Aurora Serverless relational database service for PostgreSQL, MySQL, and DSQL Amazon Bedrock The end-to-end platform for building generative AI applications and agents Amazon Connect Customer AI-native solution for delivering exceptional experiences across customer interactions EC2 Secure and resizable compute capacity for virtually any workload Nova Foundation models delivering frontier intelligence and top price performance OpenSearch Service Real-time search, observability, and security analytics S3 Virtually unlimited secure object storage for AI, analytics, and archives What’s new Explore new capabilities and the latest technologies Customer success stories Learn how customers around the world accelerate their cloud By industry By organization type Solutions Library Industry solutions on AWS Transform your industry with AWS cloud solutions. Access proven architectures, compliance guides, and success stories of customers using AWS products tailored to your sector. Explore AWS solutions for your industry. Go to industry hub Advertising and Marketing Turn data into customer-winning campaigns Aerospace and Satellite Cloud solutions to help customers build satellites, conduct space and launch operations, and reimagine space exploration Automotive Build smarter vehicles and transform mobility with cloud solutions Education Solutions to help facilitate teaching, learning, student engagement, better learning outcomes and modernize IT operations Energy and Utilities Revamp legacy operations and accelerate the development of innovative renewable energy business models Financial Services Develop innovative and secure solutions across banking, capital markets, insurance, and payments Games Enable game development for every genre and platform, from AAA titles to indie studios Government Solutions designed to help government agencies modernize, meet mandates, reduce costs, and deliver mission outcomes Healthcare and Life Sciences Accelerate innovation and improve patient care with healthcare data management and security Manufacturing Optimize production and speed time-to-market Media and Entertainment Transform media & entertainment with the most purpose-built capabilities and partner solutions of any cloud Nonprofit Cloud solutions to help nonprofits and NGOs maximize their mission impact and donor relationships Retail and Consumer Goods Empower brands to drive market differentiation and growth with cloud solutions Semiconductor Design and deliver next-generation chip solutions with cloud technology Sports Fuel innovative fan, broadcast, and athlete experiences Sustainability Tools and resources to help organizations achieve their sustainability goals with AWS Telecommunications Accelerate innovation, scale with confidence, and add agility with cloud-based telecom solutions Travel and Hospitality Elevate travel and hospitality with solutions that boost customer experiences and operational efficiency What's new Explore new capabilities and the latest technologies Customer success stories Learn how customers around the world accelerate their cloud Pricing overview & tools AWS Pricing Learn about pricing and plans in one place AWS Pricing Calculator Estimate the cost for your architecture solution AWS Free Tier Get free, hands-on experience with AWS products and services AWS Offers Explore different offer programs to gain hands-on experience AWS Savings Plans Flexible pricing model offering lower prices Single-product pricing Amazon S3 Amazon Bedrock Amazon RDS Amazon EC2 Amazon SageMaker Browse all product pricing Learn Documentation Get detailed technical guides and references for all AWS services and tools Training & Certification Build and validate your AWS cloud skills and technical expertise Cloud term glossary Learn more about key cloud computing concepts Whitepapers Expand your knowledge of the cloud with expert guides and diagrams Cloud fundamentals Step-by-step instructions for common AWS tasks Tutorials Get started with step-by-step instructions Connect & Support Builder Center Learn, build, and connect with builders in the AWS community Events and webinars Connect, collaborate, and learn from AWS experts in the cloud computing community Partner Network Collaborate with AWS partners to grow your business Marketplace Find, test, buy, and deploy third-party software Support Access proactive guidance, issue resolution, and helpful tools Professional services Accelerate business transformation with expert guidance and packaged solutions Home Federal Government Accelerator Initiatives Government Accelerator Initiatives Thank you for your interest in the AWS Worldwide Public Sector Government Accelerator initiatives. To inquire about the Warfighter Capability Accelerator or Genesis Accelerator initiatives, please contact the applicable team below. Include details about your inquiry, your company/organization/agency affiliation, and contact information so the team can respond promptly. You can look forward to receiving further details and next steps via email shortly. In the meantime, we encourage you to explore our latest offerings in Generative AI training and resources. Connect with the team: Warfighter Capability Accelerator Connect with the team: Genesis Accelerator AWS Warfighter Capability Accelerator The AWS Warfighter Capability Accelerator provides up to $50 million in AWS credits to the U.S. Department of War (DoW), defense industrial base, and defense contractors. The program will provide credits for mission uses such as AI and autonomous systems, AI-enabled battle management and decision support for Combatant Commands, homeland defense, advanced manufacturing and shipbuilding, contested logistics, priority critical cybersecurity, and space-based systems. AWS Genesis Accelerator Initiative The AWS Genesis Accelerator provides up to $50 million in AWS credits to support AI-powered scientific breakthroughs across priority domains including biotechnology, nuclear energy, supercomputing and quantum information science. This program will enable work by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), including the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), all associated national laboratories, federal research organizations, and private sector organizations. Generative AI products and services Amazon Bedrock is a fully managed generative AI service that offers a choice of high-performing foundation models (FMs) from leading AI companies like AI21 Labs, Anthropic, Cohere, Meta, Mistral AI, Stability AI, and Amazon Learn more about Amazon Bedrock Amazon Q is the most capable generative AI–powered assistant for accelerating software development and leveraging companies' internal data Learn more about Amazon Q With AWS Trainium, get high performance for deep learning and generative AI training while lowering costs Learn more about AWS Trainium Generative AI resources eBook Developer generative AI resources From beginners to experts, come learn, build, and explore generative AI on AWS Learn more about Developer generative AI resources eBook Leverage Generative AI for your public sector organization Learn how to easily build and scale faster with generative AI on AWS Read the eBook eBook Become a new tech organization with generative AI Learn how public sector organizations are using generative AI to drive growth and deliver on their mission Read the eBook eBook Build, train, and deploy machine learning models at scale Learn how you can strategically leverage machine learning to advance your organization Read the eBook eBook Make your organization secure with generative AI Learn how to rapidly adopt generative AI while helping to ensure security, privacy, and compliance Read the eBook Q: What are the Government Accelerator initiatives? What are the customer and partner benefits and resources available from the Accelerators? Q: Who can participate in these Initiatives? Q: When is the deadline to express interest? Q: How will these savings be achieved? What are the steps to using the credit? Q: Does this affect any existing government contracts with AWS? Q: What are the Government Accelerator initiatives? The AWS Worldwide Public Sector Government Accelerator initiatives are two complementary federal credit programs totally up to $100 million to accelerate innovation in support of America's most critical national security and scientific missions. The AWS Warfighter Capability Accelerator Initiative and AWS Genesis Accelerator Initiative will each provide up to $50 million in AWS credits over three years (2026-2028) to help federal agencies, national laboratories, and their supporting organizations rapidly develop and deploy advanced capabilities using AWS cloud services and generative AI technologies. What are the customer and partner benefits and resources available from the Accelerators? Benefits and resources of both initiatives include: Cloud computing credits : Up to $50 million per program to access AWS cloud technology; Training programs : Training curricula covering cloud technologies, AI/ML, and modern software development practices; and Technical expertise : Direct access to AWS solution architects and AI specialists for guidance and support. Q: Who can participate in these Initiatives? For the Warfighter Capability Accelerator Initiative... Department of War : All DOW entities. Defense Industrial Base Participants : Manufacturing facilities, technology companies, research institutions, and innovation hubs contributing to DOW production capacity, supply chain resilience, or emerging technology development. Defense Contractors : Prime contractors, subcontractors, and small businesses supporting Department of War programs, particularly those developing commercial-first solutions, modular open systems, or rapid prototyping capabilities. For the Genesis Mission Accelerator Initiative... DOE research facilities and user facilities supporting Genesis Mission objectives The National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) All associated DOE National Laboratories (including Idaho National Laboratory, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Argonne National Laboratory, and others) Federal science and research agencies Federal research institutions collaborating on Genesis Mission projects Private sector organizations directly supporting the Genesis Mission priorities Q: When is the deadline to express interest? These Government Accelerator initiatives are open from February 17, 2025 through December 31, 2028. Q: How will these savings be achieved? What are the steps to using the credit? The savings will be provided to federal agencies in the form of post-award credits. The general steps for federal agencies leveraging the AWS credit program: 1. Federal agencies must have an existing contract authorizing use of AWS Services a. This contract may be A) a direct contract between a federal agency and AWS (e.g., a task order under the JWCC or GSA Schedule contract vehicles); or B) a contract between a federal agency and a third-party that uses AWS services. 2. Federal agencies submit an attestation to AWS certifying they have completed certain migration and/or modernization milestones. 3. AWS will distribute the credits to the federal agency’s account the following month. Visit AWS Credits AWS Promotional Credits for full terms and conditions of how AWS credits Promotional Credits apply. Q: Does this affect any existing government contracts with AWS? Federal agencies with existing contracts will be able to continue their modernization and migrations journeys as previously planned. This program simply increases opportunities for federal agencies to accelerate AI innovation. Did you find what you were looking for today? Let us know so we can improve the quality of the content on our pages Yes No Create an AWS account Learn What Is AWS? What Is Cloud Computing? What Is Agentic AI? Cloud Computing Concepts Hub AWS Cloud Security What's New Blogs Press Releases Resources Getting Started Training AWS Trust Center AWS Solutions Library Architecture Center Product and Technical FAQs Analyst Reports AWS Partners Developers Builder Center SDKs & Tools .NET on AWS Python on AWS Java on AWS PHP on AWS JavaScript on AWS Help Contact Us File a Support Ticket AWS re:Post Knowledge Center AWS Support Overview AWS Accessibility Legal Event Code of Conduct Event Terms & Conditions English Back to top Amazon is an equal opportunity employer and does not discriminate on the basis of protected veteran status, disability or other legally protected status. Veterans, military spouses, and people with disabilities are encouraged to apply. x facebook linkedin instagram twitch youtube podcasts email Privacy Site terms Your Privacy Choices California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) Opt-Out Icon Cookie Preferences © 2026, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates. All rights reserved. 