 Working with the US Department of Energy to unlock the next era of scientific discovery \ Anthropic Skip to main content Skip to footer Research Policy Commitments Learn News Try Claude Announcements Working with the US Department of Energy to unlock the next era of scientific discovery Dec 18, 2025 Anthropic and the US Department of Energy (DOE) are announcing a multi-year partnership as part of the Genesis Mission— the Department’s initiative to use AI to cement America’s leadership in science. Our partnership focuses on three domains—American energy dominance, the biological and life sciences, and scientific productivity—and has the potential to affect the work being done at all 17 of America’s national laboratories. The Genesis Mission recognizes that we are at a critical moment: as global competition in AI intensifies, America must harness its unmatched scientific infrastructure—from supercomputers to decades of experimental data—and combine it with frontier AI capabilities to maintain scientific leadership. Anthropic seeks to play a key role in this effort. “Anthropic was founded by scientists who believe AI can deliver transformative progress for research itself,” said Jared Kaplan, Anthropic’s Chief Science Officer. “The Genesis Mission is the sort of ambitious, rigorous program where that belief gets tested. We’re honored to help advance science that benefits everyone.” Brian Peters, Anthropic's Head of North America Government Affairs, attended the Genesis Mission launch event today at the White House. We are looking forward to contributing to the mission and continuing to collaborate with DOE. The partnership Anthropic seeks to provide DOE researchers access both to Claude and to a team of Anthropic engineers, who can develop purpose-built tools, including: AI "agents" (models that take actions) for DOE’s highest-priority challenges Model Context Protocol servers that connect Claude to scientific instruments and tools Claude Skills for specialized expertise on relevant scientific workflows Claude can facilitate substantial advancements in: Energy dominance. Claude can help with a broad range of tasks—from speeding up permitting review processes that bottleneck America’s energy expansion to helping scientists conduct research at the frontier of nuclear technology and strengthening domestic energy security. Biological and life sciences. Claude can support the development of early-warning systems for future pandemics and biological threat detection, and be used to hasten the speed of drug discovery and development. Scientific productivity. Claude has the capacity to access fifty years of DOE research, and use this context to accelerate the research cycle in strategically important domains and provide well-informed research support in the form of new ideas to trial out, or patterns in older data that humans might have missed. Our commitment to partner with the US Government Scientific progress has always driven America’s prosperity and security. Anthropic aspires to expand existing arrangements with DOE to build the next chapter: using AI across America’s research institutions, with deep context on scientists’ work and active support from our engineers. Potential future arrangements would represent the next stage of Anthropic and DOE’s multi-year partnership. Past projects with DOE include co-development of a nuclear risk classifier with the National Nuclear Security Administration and rolling out Claude at the Lawrence Livermore national laboratory . As we learn from the current work with DOE’s, we’ll be able to develop a model for how AI and human researchers can work together—and feed this back into the development of the AI tools they use. Related content Developing Enterprise Frontier Safeguards with our customers Read more Improving our alignment and security efforts On July 30, we reported three incidents in which Claude models gained unauthorized access to real computer systems. We are conducting an in-depth analysis of both incidents, and planning to work with METR for an independent review. In the meantime, we’re sharing some of the changes we’ve made over the past month. Read more Previewing the Model Hardware Standard We’re opening a research preview of the Model Hardware Standard (MHS), a shared specification for AI agents to safely operate physical devices, to a first group of scientific research labs and advanced manufacturers. Read more Products Claude Claude Code Claude Code Enterprise Claude Cowork @Claude Claude Design Claude Science Claude Security Claude in Chrome Claude for Microsoft 365 Skills Download app Pricing Log in to Claude Models Mythos Fable Opus Sonnet Haiku Solutions AI agents Code modernization Coding Commerce Customer support Cybersecurity Enterprise Financial services Government Healthcare Higher education K-12 teachers Legal Life sciences Nonprofits Small business Claude Platform Overview Developer docs Pricing Ecosystem Marketplace Regional compliance Claude on AWS Google Cloud Microsoft Foundry Console login Resources Blog Claude partner network Community Connectors Courses Customer stories Engineering at Anthropic Events Plugins Powered by Claude Service partners Tutorials Use cases Programs Startups Research Labs Help and security Availability Status Support center Company Anthropic Careers Leadership Policy Economic Futures Research News Claude’s Constitution Claude Corps Keep thinking Policy on the AI Exponential Responsible Scaling Policy Security and compliance Transparency Terms and policies Privacy policy Consumer health data privacy policy Responsible disclosure policy Terms of service: Commercial Terms of service: Consumer Terms of Service: US K-12 Data Processing Agreement: US K-12 Usage policy © 2026 Anthropic PBC. Services in the EU are provided by Anthropic Ireland Limited. 