 Infleqtion Secures Three Genesis Mission Projects from U.S. Department of Energy | Infleqtion Skip to content Menu Menu Products Computing Quantum Computing Discover Sqale, Infleqtion’s full-stack, fault-tolerant neutral atom quantum computer Contextual Machine Learning Unlock the full potential of AI with quantum Quantum Software Our Superstaq software platform and applications research team are accelerating time to value with quantum Sensing Tiqker Atomic Clock The next-generation optical atomic clock for critical applications Quantum Spectrum Revolutionizing spectrum sensing with Rydberg atomic sensing Inertial Sensing Precise positioning in GPS-denied environments and advanced geophysical mapping Cores Quantum Cores Ready-to-use neutral-atom systems to fast-track quantum experiments Solutions National Security and Resilience Deploying quantum technologies to strengthen defense, secure communications, and enhance intelligence across land, sea, air, and space Space and Frontier Quantum technology is transforming space exploration, navigation, and Earth observation with unprecedented precision Energy and Resource Exploration Transforming energy exploration and grid management with quantum-powered optimization for faster, smarter, and more sustainable decisions AI and ML Unlock real-time, multi-source AI insights today—while paving the path to full quantum-powered intelligence Life Sciences and Drug Discovery Quantum technology is revolutionizing life sciences—speeding drug discovery, enabling precision medicine, and advancing disease research Materials Science Infleqtion’s quantum-powered modeling accelerates discovery of stronger, lighter, and more efficient materials—cutting R&D from decades to months Finance Quantum-powered tools delivering sharper insights, smarter portfolios, and faster decisions for finance Resources Neutral Atom Technology Enabling quantum capability with nature’s perfect qubits and sensors Integrated Photonics Photonics integration powering next-generation quantum systems Video Library Browse our library of webinars and videos Research Research and journals from Infleqtion scientists Document Library Download data sheets, user manuals, and more for Quantum Cores products. News Newsroom Read the latest news and announcements from Infleqtion Blog Explore insights and stories from our quantum experts Events and Webinars Find us at upcoming events around the globe Media Kit Download images, logos, and more Company About Meet Infleqtion Careers Join our team Investors Resources for investors Contact Infleqtion Secures Three Genesis Mission Projects from U.S. Department of Energy July 22, 2026 Lauren Roady Latest wins highlight ongoing expansion of Infleqtion’s role in advancing U.S. national security and quantum leadership LOUISVILLE, Colo. | July 22, 2026 | Infleqtion (NYSE: INFQ), a global leader in quantum computing and quantum sensing powered by neutral-atom technology, announced it has been awarded three projects to accelerate American scientific research and innovation by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) for the Genesis Mission . The projects include collaborations with Argonne National Laboratory, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and University of Colorado Boulder and span AI-optimized quantum circuit design for nuclear applications, deployable atomic quantum sensing with Agentic AI and nuclear fusion energy research. The Genesis Mission is a historic national initiative led by the U.S. Department of Energy, which is building the world’s most powerful integrated science discovery platform. By uniting government, industry, academia and philanthropy, it is accelerating breakthroughs in energy, scientific discovery and national security through a new platform that combines AI, supercomputing, quantum systems and advanced scientific instruments. “AI data centers are pulling more power than the grid was ever built to handle, and the industry is recognizing that these types of issues are beyond the capabilities of classical computing alone,” said Matthew Kinsella, CEO at Infleqtion. “By applying quantum computing to some of the hardest problems in nuclear and energy research, Infleqtion is playing a critical role in advancing the objectives of the Genesis Mission.” The goal of the Phase I RFA awards is to identify promising pathways toward transformative scientific capabilities and establish a foundation for future investment and scale. Project teams will design and demonstrate research workflows that integrate AI with scientific investigation, while rigorously evaluating whether those approaches can accelerate discovery, improve predictive capabilities, enhance experimentation or generate new scientific insights. Infleqtion’s quantum computing and quantum sensing products address critical market needs in positioning, navigation and timing (PNT), global communication security and efficiency, resilient energy distribution and accelerated quantum computing. The following three Genesis Mission projects have been selected: A collaboration between Argonne National Laboratory and Infleqtion to drive AI-optimization of quantum circuit design for realistic nuclear problems. A collaboration between Brookhaven National Laboratory and Infleqtion to design and test deployable atomic quantum sensing enabled by Agentic AI. A joint initiative between Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, University of Colorado Boulder and Infleqtion to simulate nonlinear plasma dynamics using quantum machine learning and agentic AI. The awards mark another significant milestone for Infleqtion as government investment in quantum technology continues to accelerate. The company recently announced a Letter of Intent with the U.S. Department of Commerce, which outlines a potential investment of up to $100 million to expand U.S. quantum capabilities, and comes amid new executive actions designed to strengthen American leadership in quantum science and technology. Together, these developments signal growing recognition that quantum is becoming a strategic national asset, with Infleqtion helping bridge breakthrough research with deployable commercial and government solutions. About Infleqtion Infleqtion, Inc. (NYSE: INFQ) is a global leader in quantum technology, delivering neutral-atom solutions for quantum computing, networking, sensing, and security. With a product portfolio spanning quantum computers, quantum optical clocks, RF receivers, and inertial sensors, Infleqtion’s full-stack approach combines high-performance hardware with the company’s proprietary Superstaq quantum computing software platform. Infleqtion’s systems are already in use by the U.S. Department of War, NASA, the U.K. government, and in multiple collaborations with NVIDIA. Infleqtion, in collaboration with NVIDIA, published the world’s first demonstration of a materials science application using logical qubits. With operations in the U.S., Europe, and Asia, Infleqtion meets the demands of government and commercial customers across the space, defense, energy, finance and telecommunications sectors. For more information, visit Infleqtion.com or follow Infleqtion on LinkedIn, YouTube , and X . Forward looking statements This press release contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of federal securities laws, including the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements may be identified by words such as “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “projects,” “seeks,” “will,” and variations of these words or similar expressions that are intended to identify forward-looking statements. All statements, other than statements of historical facts, including without limitation statements regarding the ability of Infleqtion to successfully execute a definitive agreement with the Department on acceptable terms; the completion of due diligence to the satisfaction of the Department; the anticipated amount, timing, terms and conditions of any Department funding, including whether up to $100 million in Department funding will ultimately be made available; Infleqtion’s ability to satisfy any conditions, milestones or other requirements associated with the receipt of funding, Infleqtion’s development of its neutral-atom quantum computing technology, and any other statements regarding the Company’s business outlook, customer demand, commercial opportunities, and market momentum, are forward-looking statements. These statements are based on Infleqtion’s current expectations, assumptions and projections as of the date of this release and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially and adversely. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. Such risks and uncertainties include, without limitation, those related to Infleqtion’s ability to recognize anticipated benefits of its business combination with Churchill Capital Corp X; the implementation, market acceptance, and success of Infleqtion’s business model, growth strategy, and opportunities, and its ability to commercialize its quantum computing and quantum sensing technology; the expected benefits of and ability to maintain and enter into new contracts, awards, and other relationships, partnerships, or collaborations with governments, government entities, universities, or commercial partners; the ability to develop and deploy neutral-atom quantum computing products on anticipated timelines and at anticipated performance levels; the ability to achieve fault-tolerant and utility-scale quantum computing, including anticipated improvements in entangling gate fidelity; the ability of resource-superstaq and the Superstaq platform to achieve commercial and research adoption; the potential for quantum computing technology to achieve quantum advantage; the ability of Infleqtion’s products to meet government counterparties’ and customers’ technical requirements and compliance and regulatory needs; Infleqtion’s ability to obtain and maintain intellectual property protection and not infringe on the rights of others; and other risks and uncertainties described in Infleqtion’s filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. The Company undertakes no obligation to update these forward-looking statements except as require Categories Announcements Tags Energy , National Security Infleqtion CEO Matt Kinsella Provides Testimony for House Committee on Natural Resources Infleqtion to Deploy Fault-Tolerant Neutral-Atom Quantum Computer in Illinois The Latest News, Events and Resources Subscribe to our newsletter " * " indicates required fields Facebook This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Email * Products Quantum Computing Contextual Machine Learning Quantum Software Tiqker Atomic Clock Quantum Spectrum Inertial Sensing Quantum Cores Solutions National Security and Resilience Space and Frontier Energy and Resource Exploration AI and ML Life Sciences and Drug Discovery Materials Science Finance Resources Neutral Atom Technology Integrated Photonics Video Library Research Document Library Company About Newsroom Blog Events and Webinars Media Kit Investors Careers Distributors © 2026 Infleqtion, Inc. All Rights Reserved. | Privacy Policy | Terms | Cookie Policy 