 Cornelis Partners with U.S. Department of Energy on the Genesis Mission - The Future of High Performance Fabrics | Cornelis Networks Skip to content Cornelis Networks Toggle Navigation Solutions Arrow - Right High Performance Computing Arrow - Right Get HPC solutions built for the toughest workloads with ultra-low tail latency. Artificial Intelligence Arrow - Right Designed for AI and large-scale computing, CN5000 Omni-Path delivers faster models, real-time inference, and higher ROI. Products Arrow - Right CN6000 Arrow - Right The first 800G multi-protocol SuperNIC, delivering industry-leading AI and HPC performance with Omni-Path, RoCEv2, and Ultra Ethernet on PCIe 6.0. SuperNICs Switches CN5000 Arrow - Right The first lossless, congestion-free scale-out network—delivering faster training and lower inference latency than today's alternatives. Overview SuperNICs Switches Director Class Switches Cables Software Omni-Path 100 Arrow - Right Cornelis enables HPC solutions for the world’s toughest challenges with Omni-Path Express, delivering low latency and high message rates for peak performance and scalability. Overview SuperNICs Switches Director Class Switches Cables Software Partners Resources Arrow - Right Blog Arrow - Right Read how Cornelis accelerates breakthroughs with high-performance HPC and AI solutions. White Papers Arrow - Right Read white papers on how Cornelis products demonstrate high-performance, low-latency interconnects for scalable HPC and AI. Case Studies Arrow - Right See how Cornelis solutions drive real-world results in HPC and AI through customer success stories and case studies. Online User Guides External Explore the setup and functionality of Cornelis products through technical documentation and manuals. Support Arrow - Right Software Downloads External Get access to Cornelis' latest software and product documentation. Technical Training External Cornelis Networks offers a broad range of technical training materials. Contact us for more information. Customer Support External For prompt, expert assistance with technical issues or questions, our Customer Support team is here to ensure your Cornelis Networks products run smoothly and efficiently. Company Arrow - Right About Arrow - Right We build the networks AI and HPC workloads can't wait for –– faster, scalable, and above all open. Leadership Arrow - Right Meet our Executives. Newsroom Arrow - Right Discover our latest news, announcements, and expert insights. Media Kit Arrow - Right Explore our media kit for insights, visuals, and resources that highlight how Cornelis accelerates AI and HPC innovation. Events Arrow - Right Connect with us at upcoming HPC & AI events. Careers Arrow - Right Seeking top talent to solve the world's toughest challenges. Search Contact Arrow - Right Cornelis Partners with U.S. Department of Energy on the Genesis Mission November 25th, 2025 by Rob Hays, Vice President, Public Sector at Cornelis Networks Yesterday, the President of the United States signed an Executive Order launching the Genesis Mission , a national effort to use artificial intelligence (AI) to transform how scientific research is conducted and accelerate the speed of scientific discovery. The initiative will unite America’s smartest minds, most powerful computers, and vast scientific data into one cooperative system for research under the direction of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). Cornelis was among a select group of American technology leaders chosen to partner with the DOE to define and build the infrastructure for the Genesis Mission. We believe that the future of innovation depends on the ability to connect ideas, data, and people at unprecedented scale and speed. That’s why Cornelis is proud to be selected as an industry partner for this initiative. Building the Backbone of American AI Leadership What’s unique about the Genesis AI platform versus commercial platforms publicly available is that it will leverage secure scientific data accumulated by the 17 U.S. national labs over decades of research and dozens of scientific domains - data that isn’t available anywhere else. Genesis will integrate multiple DOE programs to accomplish three top objectives from my perspective. Genesis will make the vast troves of American scientific research data readily accessible to researchers to build upon for future discoveries. It will combine the American Science Cloud (AmSC), a new national cloud platform designed to federate scientific data and make it available to researchers with modern AI, the High Performance Data Facility (HPDF) enabling researchers to access and analyze massive datasets critical to scientific discovery, and the Energy Sciences Network (ESNet) that connects national laboratories, universities, and research centers worldwide. It will bring cutting-edge AI capabilities developed in the private sector to train new models on the U.S. datasets, provide novel ways to synthesize, analyze, and interpret the data at a scale that humans alone could never accomplish. Genesis will leverage the Transformational AI Models Consortium (ModCon) to develop AI models for scientific discovery and national security with the stated goal to double the productivity and impact of American research and innovation within a decade. To fund the program and move quickly, a national AI computing infrastructure will be built via public-private partnerships to source the land, energy, and technology required. The plan is for data centers and power plants co-located on U.S. land with industry-funded and operated facilities strategically placed at DOE sites for resilience and sustainability while deferring up front capital costs for tax payers. High-performance interconnects are the connective tissue that makes this ecosystem possible and what Cornelis excels in. By enabling ultra-low latency, high-bandwidth communication across diverse platforms, we will help data flow seamlessly and insights emerge faster than ever before. Unlocking the Power of Data Genesis will transform how U.S. researchers access and use data from the DOE national laboratories. Speed & Scale: HPDF ensures faster storage and retrieval of massive datasets from DOE computing facilities. Nationwide Access: AmSC extends user access across the country, giving researchers secure, cloud-based entry points. AI Discovery: Advanced AI search tools will allow scientists to quickly locate and analyze data from prior experiments and simulations. Accelerated Research: Reduced duplication and tighter collaboration will drive breakthroughs in climate science, energy, materials, and beyond. During a recent visit to the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC) at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, I was struck by its huge tape libraries—an archive that safeguards decades of scientific research data. This data preservation is invaluable, ensuring future generations can learn from and build upon past discoveries. Yet today, much of that data resides in slow tape systems with limited performance and user access. With storage & network performance upgrades, cloud platform access, and AI discovery tools, this treasure trove of knowledge will become far more accessible, searchable, and usable nationwide, accelerating the pace of discovery across disciplines. Photos: One of many tape drive libraries containing historical research data at the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC) in Berkeley, California A Natural Evolution of Our DOE Partnership Cornelis is honored to be selected to partner with the DOE on the Genesis Mission alongside some of the world’s largest technology companies—each a national treasure in its own right. This program is an evolution of our long-term collaboration with the DOE since our founding five years ago. Cornelis has partnered with DOE on research & development for the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) to co-optimize our hardware with their software applications and deploy our technology in their production infrastructure. Most recently, we announced a collaboration with Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) and Dell Technologies to deliver the Lynx cluster, a cutting-edge system that exemplifies the power of joint innovation. Photo, left to right: Si Hammond (DOE NNSA), Lisa Spelman (Cornelis), Gunnar Gunnarsson (Cornelis), Phil Murphy (Cornelis), Rob Hays (Cornelis), and Matt Leininger (LLNL) at DOE headquarters in Washington D.C. Driving Scientific Discovery and National Competitiveness Genesis Mission is more than an infrastructure project—it is a national commitment to scientific excellence and technological leadership. Cornelis is honored to play a role in this effort. Together with the DOE and our industry partners, we are building the foundation to advance scientific research and national competitiveness. As this program unfolds, Cornelis will continue to provide the open, intelligent, high-performance networking solutions that enable large-scale collaboration and AI-driven innovation, here in the U.S.A., where the next generation of breakthroughs are being built. Continue Reading August 19th, 2026 Cornelis and NEC Corporation Expand Collaboration to Advance AI and HPC Infrastructure in Japan Learn More Arrow - Right July 21st, 2026 Cornelis Announces New Reference Architecture for AI Inference, Training, and HPC Built for AMD 6th Gen EPYC ™ and AMD Instinct ™ MI400 Series Learn More Arrow - Right June 26th, 2026 Cornelis CN5000 Powers LLNL/NNSA CTS-2 "Lynx" Supercomputer Learn More External View All Top Stories Arrow - Right The Network AI Has Been Waiting For Products CN5000 Omni-Path ® Omni-Path 100 Resources Blog White Papers Case Studies Online User Guides External Company Careers Events Newsroom Support Software Downloads External Technical Training External Customer Support External LinkedIn YouTube Copyright 2026 Cornelis Networks. All Rights Reserved. Privacy Policy 