 Quantinuum Enters into Letter of Intent with the U.S. Department of Commerce for Funding Opportunity to Accelerate U.S. Leadership in Quantum Computing Products & Solutions Quantum Computers Quantinuum Systems Discover the world’s highest performing quantum computers System Model H1 Our first-generation quantum computer with a linear architecture System Model H2 Our second-generation quantum computer with a racetrack architecture Helios Our Hardware-as-a-Service provides access on-premise, in the cloud, or both Hardware Roadmap Explore our accelerated roadmap aimed at advancing commercial quantum computing SOlutions Quantum Origin Our advanced quantum random number generator (QRNG), designed to strengthen encryption and protect data InQuanto Accelerate quantum computational chemistry for complex molecular & materials simulations Nexus All-in-one quantum computing platform for accessing and managing the highest performance full-stack Cloud Access Explore using our world-leading quantum hardware for commercial applications Developer Tools TKET Develop and execute gate-level quantum computation Guppy Program the next generation of quantum computers with our purpose-built language hosted in Python Lambeq Experiment with the structural relationships between quantum theory and natural languages Research Research Areas Discover the vast landscape of our scientific expertise Technical Blog Get educated on the world of quantum computing Publications Explore research and journal publications from our scientific teams Company About Quantinuum Learn more about the world’s largest integrated quantum computing company Careers Join us in the center of gravity for quantum computing Contact Us Get in touch with our team Investors Visit our Investor Relations site News Press Releases See how Quantinuum is pushing the boundaries in the world of quantum Blog Taking steps forward across the quantum computing landscape Glossary Better understand quantum computing with these terms and definitions Community Q-Net Join our user community aimed at shared learning, support and collaboration for our full-stack technologies Events Find out where we’ll be next Startup Partner Program Pioneering startups connect with us to accelerate ecosystem innovation and access our world-leading technologies Let's Talk Button Text lets talk Get Access Products & Solutions Quantum Computers Quantinuum Systems Discover the world’s highest performing quantum computers System Model H1 Our first-generation quantum computer with a linear architecture System Model H2 Our latest-generation quantum computer with a racetrack architecture Helios Our Hardware-as-a-Service provides access on-premise, in the cloud, or both Hardware Roadmap Explore our accelerated roadmap aimed at advancing commercial quantum computing SOlutions Quantum Origin Our advanced quantum random number generator (QRNG), designed to strengthen encryption and protect data InQuanto Accelerate quantum computational chemistry and for complex molecular & materials simulations Nexus (Beta) All-in-one quantum computing platform for accessing and managing the highest performance full-stack Cloud Access Explore using our world-leading quantum hardware for commercial applications Developer Tools TKET Develop and execute gate-level quantum computation Lambeq Experiment with the structural relationships between quantum theory and natural languages Qermit Run error-mitigation protocols on quantum processors Research Research Areas Discover the vast landscape of our scientific expertise Technical Blog Get educated on the world of quantum computing Publications Explore research and journal publications from our scientific teams Company About Quantinuum Learn more about the world’s largest integrated quantum computing company Careers Join us in the center of gravity for quantum computing Contact Us Get in touch with our team Investors Visit our Investor Relations site News Press Releases See how Quantinuum is pushing the boundaries in the world of quantum Blog Taking steps forward across the quantum computing landscape Events Find out where we’ll be next Glossary Better understand quantum computing with these terms and definitions Community Q-Net Join our user community aimed at shared learning, support and collaboration for our full-stack technologies Startup Partner Program Pioneering startups connect with us to accelerate ecosystem innovation and access our world-leading technologies Get Access Get Access Let's Talk Get Access Quantinuum Enters into Letter of Intent with the U.S. Department of Commerce for Funding Opportunity to Accelerate U.S. Leadership in Quantum Computing May 21, 2026 Letter of intent from the U.S. Department of Commerce proposes to provide R&D funding for Quantinuum to address specific technology bottlenecks in the development of fault-tolerant trapped-ion quantum computers Quantinuum expected to partner with leading onshore semiconductor manufacturing and photonics technology suppliers to strengthen U.S. semiconductor supply chain and manufacturing capabilities Washington, DC, May 21 st , 2026 — Quantinuum, a leading quantum computing company, today announced a letter of intent with the U.S. Department of Commerce’s CHIPS Research and Development Office. The letter of intent proposes that Quantinuum would receive federal funding to enable the development of large-scale, fault-tolerant trapped-ion quantum computers that are of national strategic importance. “With today’s CHIPS Research and Development investments in quantum computing, the Trump administration is leading the world into a new era of American innovation,” said Secretary of Commerce Howard Lutnick . “These strategic quantum technology investments will build on our domestic industry, creating thousands of high-paying American jobs while advancing American quantum capabilities.” Key to this initiative is overcoming specific technical bottlenecks and strengthening domestic supply chains and manufacturing capabilities, consistent with the U.S. government’s goal of growing its leadership in semiconductor technology and accelerating the commercialization of frontier industries, such as artificial intelligence and quantum computing. “Quantum computing has the potential to unlock new possibilities across science, industry, and national priorities for decades to come,” said Dr. Rajeeb Hazra, President and CEO of Quantinuum . “This collaboration with the Department of Commerce is designed to help Quantinuum’s path to large-scale, fault-tolerant trapped-ion systems while strengthening the U.S. innovation and manufacturing ecosystem.” The letter of intent supports Quantinuum’s plan to partner with the CHIPS R&D Office and onshore suppliers GlobalFoundries, for critical semiconductor components, and Monarch Quantum, for integrated photonics, to further optimize key engineering pathways for components within Quantinuum’s future commercial roadmap. “GlobalFoundries is excited to partner with Quantinuum on their ion-trap quantum technology,” said Tim Breen, CEO of GlobalFoundries . “We believe GF’s differentiated semiconductor platforms in cryo-CMOS, cryo-3D interconnect, and advanced packaging, combined with Quantinuum's deep ion-trap expertise, will help Quantinuum accelerate their quantum system scale-up roadmap to utility-scale quantum computing.” “Monarch Quantum is proud to partner with Quantinuum to advance U.S. leadership in next-generation computing infrastructure,” said Dr. Timothy Day, Chairman & CEO of Monarch Quantum . “By delivering advanced integrated photonics through a resilient domestic supply chain, we are committed to supporting the secure, scalable manufacturing required for fault-tolerant quantum systems.” In addition to strengthening domestic semiconductor manufacturing and supply chain resilience, this initiative is expected to support development of a specialized workforce for next-generation quantum computing technologies. About Quantinuum Quantinuum is a leading quantum computing company offering a full-stack platform designed to make quantum computing deployable in real-world environments. The company has commercially deployed multiple generations of trapped-ion based quantum systems built on the well-established QCCD architecture, which it has implemented with novel designs and capabilities to achieve the industry’s highest accuracy levels based on average two-qubit gate fidelity. 1 Quantinuum has active engagements with market leaders across pharmaceuticals, material science, financial services, and government and industrial markets. The company has a global workforce of approximately 700 employees, including top scientists and researchers. Over 70% of its technology team holds PhDs or Master’s degrees. Quantinuum’s headquarters is in Broomfield, Colorado, with additional facilities across the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, Japan, Qatar, and Singapore. For more information, please visit www.quantinuum.com . Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements This press release contains certain statements that may be deemed “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements include all statements that are not historical facts. The words “anticipate,” “assume,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “future,” “will,” “seek,” “foreseeable,” the negative version of these words, or similar terms and phrases are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Such statements are based on certain assumptions and assessments made by our management in light of their experience and their perception of historical trends, current economic and industry conditions, expected future developments and other factors they believe to be appropriate. The forward-looking statements included in this release are also subject to a number of material risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to economic, competitive, governmental, and technological factors affecting our operations, markets, products, services and prices. New factors emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for Quantinuum to predict all such factors. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and, except as required by law, Quantinuum does not undertake any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. 1 As of December 31, 2025. ‍ About Quantinuum Quantinuum, the world’s largest integrated quantum company, pioneers powerful quantum computers and advanced software solutions. Quantinuum’s technology drives breakthroughs in materials discovery, cybersecurity, and next-gen quantum AI. With over 500 employees, including 370+ scientists and engineers, Quantinuum leads the quantum computing revolution across continents. September 8, 2026 Quantinuum Finalizes $100 Million CHIPS R&D Award with U.S. Department of Commerce to Advance Trapped-Ion Quantum Computer Manufacturing in the US The federal funding supports critical R&D and U.S. quantum semiconductor manufacturing capabilities needed to scale fault-tolerant trapped-ion quantum computing. Company partnering with GlobalFoundries to fabricate next-gen ion traps and control electronics, and Monarch Quantum to develop and manufacture reliable lasers and optical components. Washington, D.C. – September 8, 2026 – Quantinuum (Nasdaq: QNT), a leading quantum computing company, today announced it has finalized an agreement with the U.S. Department of Commerce’s CHIPS Research and Development Office for $100 million in federal funding deployed through the CHIPS and Science Act. The award, which follows a letter of intent announce in May, supports R&D and U.S. quantum semiconductor manufacturing capabilities needed to deploy large-scale, fault-tolerant trapped-ion quantum computers. Quantinuum, which was the only company with a trapped-ion based architecture to be awarded CHIPS R&D funding, develops the world’s most accurate commercial 1 computers with industry-leading error correction fidelity. 2 The company leverages established semiconductor manufacturing processes to help ensure reliability, repeatability, and scalability of the company’s current and future quantum computers. “This award is a validation of Quantinuum’s leadership in trapped-ion quantum computing," said Dr. Rajeeb Hazra, President and CEO of Quantinuum . “Together with our domestic partners, we are building the technology and supply-chain foundation needed to scale fault-tolerant systems and strengthen America's leadership in this strategically important field.” The award will support R&D that the company expects to help strengthen and diversify its supply chain, adding onshore partners GlobalFoundries and Monarch Quantum. GlobalFoundries will be one of several of Quantinuum’s foundries enlisted to fabricate its next-generation ion traps and other electronics, specifically focused on using 300mm wafer technology; Monarch Quantum plans to develop and manufacture scalable, reliable lasers and optical components required for Quantinuum’s trapped-ion systems. “As quantum computing moves closer to commercial scale, manufacturing will be critical to unlocking its full potential,” said Tim Breen, CEO of GlobalFoundries . “GlobalFoundries is proud to partner with Quantinuum to help scale their trapped-ion technology. By bringing our expertise in high-volume, differentiated semiconductor manufacturing, we're helping create a path to more scalable, reliable quantum hardware and advancing the next generation of American innovation.” “The road to large-scale, trapped-ion quantum computers relies on moving away from complex, sprawling optical setups to scalable, reliable integrated photonics engines," said Dr. Timothy Day, CEO of Monarch Quantum. "We are honored to expand our partnership with Quantinuum to advance their hardware roadmap and to help strengthen U.S. leadership in quantum computing manufacturing and supply chain resilience.” Together, these efforts are intended to reduce system complexity and improve component robustness, reliability, and reproducibility, ultimately supporting the continued scaling of trapped-ion quantum computers, while strengthening domestic capability across critical photonics and semiconductor manufacturing. About Quantinuum Quantinuum is a leading quantum computing company offering a full-stack platform designed to make quantum computing deployable in real-world environments. The company has commercially deployed multiple generations of trapped-ion based quantum systems built on the well-established QCCD architecture, which it has implemented with novel designs and capabilities to achieve the industry’s highest accuracy levels based on average two-qubit gate fidelity. 3 Quantinuum has active engagements with market leaders across pharmaceuticals, material science, financial services, and government and industrial markets, as well as academic and research institutions globally. The company has a global workforce of over 800 employees, including top scientists and researchers. Quantinuum’s headquarters is in Broomfield, Colorado, with additional facilities across the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, Japan, Qatar, and Singapore. For more information, please visit www.quantinuum.com. Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements This press release contains certain statements that may be deemed “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements include all statements that are not historical facts. The words “anticipate,” “assume,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “future,” “will,” “seek,” “foreseeable,” the negative version of these words, or similar terms and phrases are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Such statements are based on certain assumptions and assessments made by our management in light of their experience and their perception of historical trends, current economic and industry conditions, expected future developments and other factors they believe to be appropriate. The forward-looking statements included in this release are also subject to a number of material risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to economic, competitive, governmental, and technological factors affecting our operations, markets, products, services and prices. New factors emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for Quantinuum to predict all such factors. For additional information on these and other risks that could affect Quantinuum’s forward-looking statements, see Quantinuum’s risk factors discussed in its filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, including its Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the period ended June 30, 2026, as such risk factors may be updated from time to time. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and, except as required by law, Quantinuum does not undertake any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. 1 Based on physical two-qubit gate fidelity as of December 31, 2025, according to the 2025 Ransford et al. study . 2 As of February 25, 2026, according to the 2026 Dasu et al. study . 3 As of December 31, 2025. ‍ This is some text inside of a div block. All This is some text inside of a div block. All This is some text inside of a div block. All Read More September 4, 2026 Quantinuum to Participate in the Bernstein 23rd Annual Pan-European Strategic Decisions Conference BROOMFIELD, Colo., September 4, 2026 - Quantinuum Inc. (Nasdaq: QNT) (the “Company”), a leading quantum computing company, today announced that members of its management team will participate in the Bernstein 23rd Annual Pan-European Strategic Decisions Conference, taking place September 9–10, 2026, in London, United Kingdom. Quantinuum will participate in a fireside chat and host one-on-one meetings with investors during the conference. About Quantinuum Quantinuum is a leading quantum computing company offering a full-stack platform designed to make quantum computing deployable in real-world environments. The company has commercially deployed multiple generations of trapped-ion based quantum systems built on the well-established QCCD architecture, which it has implemented with novel designs and capabilities to achieve the industry’s highest accuracy levels based on average two-qubit gate fidelity. Quantinuum has active engagements with market leaders across pharmaceuticals, material science, financial services, and government and industrial markets, as well as academic and research institutions globally. The company has a global workforce of approximately 800 employees, including top scientists and researchers. Over 70% of its technology team holds PhDs or Master’s degrees. Quantinuum’s headquarters is in Broomfield, Colorado, with additional facilities across the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, Japan, Qatar, and Singapore. Contacts Investor & Media Contact Shub Mukherjee - Investor Contact - investors@quantinuum.com Aaron Sorenson - Media Contact - press@quantinuum.com ‍ This is some text inside of a div block. All This is some text inside of a div block. All This is some text inside of a div block. All Read More September 3, 2026 Quantinuum Signs Non-binding MOU with Aramco to Explore Synergies Leveraging Industrial Quantum Computing Research, Applications, and Expertise Quantinuum and Aramco sign MOU at LEAP: Dr. Rajeeb Hazra, President and CEO of Quantinuum (left), and Sami Al Ajmi, Senior Vice President of Digital & Information Technology at Aramco (right), at the signing ceremony in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Non-binding Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) aims to support innovation and operational excellence within the energy sector. ‍ Riyadh, August 31, 2026: Quantinuum, a leading quantum computing company, today announced the signing of a non-binding MOU with Aramco, one of the world’s leading integrated energy and chemicals companies, to explore a series of industrial use cases, enhance quantum computing capabilities, and prepare for a potential research collaboration focused on fault-tolerant quantum computing. Under the MOU, the companies intend to undertake preliminary technical onboarding and engage in knowledge exchange activities. They will also identify Aramco’s challenges that may be suitable for quantum computing research with an emphasis on solving complex problems in energy and digital transformation. The collaboration aims to assess how future generations of quantum systems may address relevant scientific and industrial challenges, and to benchmark different quantum computing modalities. The collaboration complements Aramco’s existing initiatives to position itself as a leader in the application of advanced quantum technologies within the energy industry, reinforcing its efforts towards supporting the digital transformation of the sector and contributing to the evolving quantum computing roadmap for the energy industry. “Organizations that expect to benefit from quantum computing need to begin developing their expertise, algorithms and workflows today,” said Dr. Rajeeb Hazra, President and CEO of Quantinuum . “This MOU creates a framework for Quantinuum and Aramco to exchange expertise, identify important industrial challenges and prepare for a deeper research collaboration. By combining Aramco’s scientific and engineering knowledge with Quantinuum’s integrated hardware and software capabilities, we aim to build a strong foundation for research across future generations of quantum computing.” About Quantinuum Quantinuum is a leading quantum computing company offering a full-stack platform designed to make quantum computing deployable in real-world environments. The company has commercially deployed multiple generations of trapped-ion based quantum systems built on the well-established QCCD architecture, which it has implemented with novel designs and capabilities to achieve the industry’s highest accuracy levels based on average two-qubit gate fidelity. 1 Quantinuum has active engagements with market leaders across pharmaceuticals, material science, financial services, and government and industrial markets, as well as academic and research institutions globally. The company has a global workforce of over 800 employees, including top scientists and researchers. Quantinuum’s headquarters is in Broomfield, Colorado, with additional facilities across the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, Japan, Qatar, and Singapore. For more information, please visit www.quantinuum.com. Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements This press release contains certain statements that may be deemed “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements include all statements that are not historical facts. The words “anticipate,” “assume,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “future,” “will,” “seek,” “foreseeable,” the negative version of these words, or similar terms and phrases are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Such statements are based on certain assumptions and assessments made by our management in light of their experience and their perception of historical trends, current economic and industry conditions, expected future developments and other factors they believe to be appropriate. The forward-looking statements included in this release are also subject to a number of material risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to economic, competitive, governmental, and technological factors affecting our operations, markets, products, services and prices. New factors emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for Quantinuum to predict all such factors. For additional information on these and other risks that could affect Quantinuum’s forward-looking statements, see Quantinuum’s risk factors discussed in its filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, including its Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the period ended June 30, 2026, as such risk factors may be updated from time to time. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and, except as required by law, Quantinuum does not undertake any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. 1 As of December 31, 2025. ‍ ‍ This is some text inside of a div block. All This is some text inside of a div block. All This is some text inside of a div block. All Read More Company About Us Careers Investors Leadership Newsroom Publications Contact Us Quantinuum Japan Products & Solutions Quantinuum Systems Helios Quantum Origin InQuanto Nexus Developer Tools Get Started Hardware Access Cloud Access Documentation Stay Connected Q-Net Startup Partner Program Legal Privacy Statement Cookie Notice Website Terms & Conditions Commercial Terms & Conditions Trademark Usage Guidelines License Agreements Cookie Preferences Integrity & Compliance © 2026 Quantinuum. All rights reserved. 