 Siemens to help build AI-ready infrastructure for DOE | Siemens Home Press Release Siemens to help build AI-ready scientific infrastructure as part of U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission March 11, 2026 Washington, D.C., USA Siemens brings world-class capabilities in industrial AI, digital twin technology, and engineering to DOE’s Genesis Mission, building on its longstanding collaboration Today, Siemens announced it has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) to support the Genesis Mission, a federal initiative to modernize America’s scientific infrastructure and strengthen the translation of research into real-world deployment through advanced AI, computing, and interoperable digital systems. The Genesis Mission seeks to accelerate discovery, strengthen lab-to-industry translation, and reinforce technological leadership across critical domains. As a global industrial technology leader, Siemens brings decades of experience in digital engineering, high-fidelity simulation, industrial AI, scientific data lifecycle management, and mission-critical infrastructure. Siemens is prepared to help provide industrial technology that aligns directly with the Genesis Mission’s goal of compressing discovery timelines and ensuring breakthroughs can scale into operational environments. "The Genesis Mission’s goal of accelerating scientific discovery and scaling it in the real world is a perfect match for our core expertise: combining the real and the digital worlds," said Roland Busch, President and CEO of Siemens AG. "Our leadership in industrial AI and advanced simulation is proven in national laboratories and industrial ecosystems across the United States and worldwide. We look forward to contributing these capabilities to make the Genesis Mission a success." Siemens’ unique expertise brings AI into the real world by uniting scientific data, physics-informed simulation, digital twins, automation systems, and secure infrastructure into a connected industrial tech stack. Rather than delivering isolated AI models or point solutions, Siemens integrates deep domain AI directly into engineering, validation, and operational workflows, enabling discoveries to be simulated, tested, validated, and deployed within the same interoperable digital environment. “Siemens has a long history of trusted partnership with the U.S. government, supporting scientific leadership and industrial competitiveness,” said Ann Fairchild, Interim President and CEO, Siemens Corporation. “The Genesis Mission represents an immense opportunity to modernize the digital infrastructure that underpins scientific discovery and innovation. Together with DOE and partners, we can strengthen the connection between research and real-world deployment, accelerating innovation across industry and infrastructure.” By maintaining continuity from research to deployment, Siemens’ end-to-end solutions ensure resilience and scalability across complex physical systems, helping translate breakthrough research into reliable, real-world impact across energy, manufacturing, infrastructure, and other mission-critical domains. Our integrated approach empowers the Genesis Mission to bridge the gap between advanced research and tangible impact, accelerating discovery and enabling resilient, future-ready scientific infrastructure. Through its participation, Siemens will engage with DOE, interagency stakeholders, and private sector partners to explore collaboration on interoperable, secure, and industrial-grade digital infrastructure for science and engineering. This includes advancing AI-enabled simulation and digital twins, scientific data lifecycle governance, lab-to-deployment workflows, and the resilient physical infrastructure required to support AI-intensive research environments. Siemens’ participation builds on its longstanding engagement with DOE and the National Laboratories, as well as its broader commitment to advancing U.S. innovation, manufacturing, and infrastructure. Siemens Government Technologies, a wholly owned but distinct operating unit for Siemens in the U.S., enables collaboration with government researchers across domains at all classification levels given its regulatory framework and certified procurement and accounting systems, with a proven track record of delivering advanced software solutions for missions of national consequence. Follow us: www.x.com/siemens_press About Siemens Siemens Corporation is a U.S. subsidiary of Siemens AG, a leading technology company focused on industry, infrastructure, transport, and healthcare. The company’s purpose is to create technology to transform the everyday, for everyone. By combining the real and the digital worlds, Siemens empowers customers to accelerate their digital and sustainability transformations, making factories more efficient, cities more livable, and transportation more sustainable. A leader in industrial AI, Siemens leverages its deep domain know-how to apply AI – including generative AI – to real-world applications, making AI accessible and impactful for customers across diverse industries. Siemens also owns a majority stake in the publicly listed company Siemens Healthineers, a leading global medical technology provider pioneering breakthroughs in healthcare. For everyone. Everywhere. Sustainably. In fiscal year 2025, which ended on September 30, 2025, the Siemens Group USA generated revenue of $24.427 billion with 25 manufacturing sites across the U.S. and more than 50,000 employees serving customers in all 50 states and Puerto Rico. Contacts for Press Charlie DiPasquale Phone: +1-240-481-6632 Email: Charlie.DiPasquale@Siemens.com Christine Whitman Phone: +1-202-316-2347 Email: christine.whitman@siemens.com Further Reading Press Release all Siemens strengthens leadership in industrial software and AI with acquisition of Altair Engineering October 30, 2024 News Story all SPX FLOW and Siemens collaborate on revolutionary Digital Twin and AI product design January 29, 2025 