 Siemens Brings Industrial AI Skills to Genesis Mission | Siemens Skip to main content Home Company Insights US Stories Genesis Mission Siemens Brings Industrial AI Skills to Genesis Mission Ann Fairchild, Interim CEO and President, Siemens USA When the first public AI models emerged in 2022, industry sought a quick transition from experimentation to execution. Businesses recognized AI as more than just a new tech cycle. They saw it as a fundamental platform shift with the power to redefine productivity, competitiveness, and growth. Pharmaceutical companies saw a way to speed up drug discovery, developing life-altering medicines at a faster pace. Automakers could advance the design, training, and testing of autonomous vehicles, building safer cars. Manufacturers could optimize operations, boosting performance, energy efficiency, and worker safety. But making the most of AI’s potential takes more than just ideas and investment. It takes infrastructure : resilient, physical infrastructure that can successfully speed up AI deployment. The construction of new AI factories—which Siemens supports from grid, to chip, to building—is a good first step. But the real opportunity lies in industrializing intelligence across enterprises and sectors. To help bring that vision to life, Siemens is joining the U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission . Through this project, Siemens can help accelerate the scientific discovery required to bring AI to real places, including labs, offices, hospitals, warehouses, and factories. Bridging the gap between the real and digital worlds As a leader in Industrial AI, Siemens is already enabling customers to apply AI to physical assets and operations in industry, infrastructure, and transportation. As Roland Busch, CEO of Siemens AG, noted in his keynote address at CES 2026 , “We are making it easy to scale Industrial AI for real-world systems. We are creating real-world impact, bringing together AI-powered technologies and industrial domain knowhow.” Siemens’ unique blend of digital and industrial capabilities is key to bridging the gap between AI generation and deployment. Still, scaling AI across the U.S. is a bigger task than any one company can manage. It is a collective ambition, supported by technology companies, infrastructure experts, and policymakers nationwide. Department of Energy taps Siemens for Genesis Mission In late February, Siemens signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), joining the Genesis Mission . The project aims to accelerate scientific discovery, turning research into real-world deployment of AI through advanced computing and digital infrastructure. By enabling scalable, AI-ready scientific environments, the public and private sectors can shorten delivery timelines, boosting the rapid application of AI across industries. This collaboration is a natural fit for Siemens, given our expertise in Industrial AI, critical infrastructure, simulation, digital engineering, and scientific data management. Siemens technologies are already widely deployed in national laboratories, research institutions, and industrial operations nationwide, connecting data, models, assets, and facilities. Our teams also have a long history of working with the U.S. federal government and DOE’s national laboratory system, successfully collaborating with the public sector. What this means for American AI leadership From government, to technology, to industry, America is racing to cement its status as an AI leader on the world stage. Both the public and private sectors view AI as key to breakthrough innovation, technological advancement, and economic competitiveness. To achieve this, America must build out the foundational infrastructure that supports AI, spreading the technology’s benefits across industries. As part of the Genesis Mission, Siemens can directly contribute to these goals. By working with partners in energy, technology, and infrastructure, Siemens can help develop secure, interoperable, industrial-grade digital infrastructure. With our Industrial AI and physical infrastructure capabilities , Siemens can truly scale up AI deployment—not incrementally, but broadly and rapidly. Published: March 11, 2026 京ICP备06054295号 京公网安备 11010502040638号 