 Cosylab selected for U.S. Department of Energy's Genesis Mission - Cosylab The Control Backbone for Commercial Fusion → Download the Fusionics White Paper Solutions Open mega menu BIG SCIENCE Particle Accelerators Fusion Astronomy RADIATION ONCOLOGY Radiation Therapy HIGH TECH & INDUSTRIAL Quantum Systems Semiconductor Space Products Open mega menu PLANONE™ starQ Controller Resources Open mega menu Customer stories Blog Expertise News & events Careers About Open mega menu About us Leadership team Contact us Book a meeting EN sl en zh ja Book a meeting EN sl en zh ja close Filter Search View all results Systems Engineering for Scientific, Medical & Industrial Systems Cosylab selected for U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission Cosylab selected for U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission Publish date: 7. August 2026 Category: Accelerators Cosylab has been selected for the U.S. Department of Energy's (DOE) Genesis Mission to participate in a Phase I project. Cosylab selected for U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission Share: Facebook Instagram Twitter The Genesis Mission is a national initiative to accelerate scientific discovery through artificial intelligence. The Phase I project, “AI-Driven, Self-Learning Digital Twins for Robust Operation of Particle Accelerators,” is led by Brookhaven National Laboratory , with Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility , Cornell University , RadiaSoft , and Cosylab as partners. The project aims to combine physics-based accelerator models with machine learning to develop AI-enabled digital twins. This approach is intended to advance understanding of accelerator operations, account for uncertainty, and support real-time decision-making, situating the work at the intersection of accelerator control and artificial intelligence. The official DOE announcement is available here . Back Meet Cosylab at ASTRO 2026 in Boston Meet Cosylab at ASTRO 2026 in Boston Book a demo The leading provider of cutting-edge expertise, software and electronics for the world’s most advanced systems and devices. Our expertise Expertise Solutions Radiation therapy Manufacturers Clinics Complex medical solutions Quantum starQ Controller Accelerators Fusion Space Astronomy Media Blog News & events About Contact About us Careers linkedin facebook instagram twitter Privacy policy © 2026 Cosylab. All rights reserved. 