 NVIDIA, US Government to Boost AI Infrastructure and R&D Investments Through Landmark Genesis Mission | NVIDIA Blog Skip to content NVIDIA, US Government to Boost AI Infrastructure and R&D Investments Through Landmark Genesis Mission NVIDIA and the US Department of Energy outline priorities for collaboration in support of accelerating scientific discovery. December 18, 2025 by John Josephakis 0 Comments Share Share This Article X Facebook LinkedIn Copy link Link copied! NVIDIA will join the U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE) Genesis Mission as a private industry partner to keep U.S. AI both the leader and the standard in technology around the world. The Genesis Mission, which is part of an Executive Order recently signed by President Trump, aims to redefine American leadership in AI across three key areas: energy, scientific research and national security. NVIDIA will offer its services to the Department to integrate a discovery platform that unites the U.S. government, industry and academia. DOE officials expect the Genesis Mission to double the productivity and impact of American science and engineering, and deliver decisive breakthroughs to secure American energy dominance, accelerate scientific discovery and strengthen national security. NVIDIA and the DOE are already achieving groundbreaking results in key areas, including: Open AI science models, such as with NVIDIA Apollo family, to advance weather forecasting, computational fluid dynamics and structural mechanics; AI for optimizing manufacturing and supply chain processes; Robotics, edge AI and autonomous labs, including through the use of high-fidelity simulation and AI-enabled digital twins; Nuclear energy, including fission and fusion research; Quantum computing research, using supercomputers and AI to accelerate the discovery of new algorithms; Biology, materials science and synthetic design for healthcare; and critical-materials breakthroughs. NVIDIA, DOE Announce MOU In addition, NVIDIA announced that it has signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the Department to outline priorities of the collaboration in support of accelerating scientific discovery. The MOU includes, but is not limited to, AI for manufacturing and supply chain, open-source AI, fission energy, robotics, AI-enabled digital twins, fusion energy, quantum computing and science. Together, these priorities focus on using advanced AI, robotics and high‑performance computing to transform energy, manufacturing and scientific discovery across the Department of Energy mission space. They emphasize AI-enabled design, operation and control of complex systems, such as nuclear fission and fusion reactors, experimental facilities, digital twins of infrastructure and autonomous laboratories, including at the edge for real-time decision-making. Additional opportunities for collaboration may include accelerating breakthroughs in quantum computing, materials science, biology and synthetic design, subsurface and geothermal resources, and environmental cleanup, as well as open science-optimized AI models and AI “co-scientists” that speed algorithm development and code generation for demanding scientific applications.​ Building on Supercomputing Collaborations NVIDIA’s support of the Genesis Mission comes on the heels of a series of collaborations between NVIDIA and the DOE made during the NVIDIA GTC Washington, D.C., conference, including NVIDIA and Oracle working together to build the Department’s largest supercomputer for scientific research at Argonne National Laboratory. This is in addition to news that NVIDIA will support seven new systems across Argonne and Los Alamos National Laboratories, accelerating the DOE’s mission of driving technological leadership. NVIDIA pioneered the accelerated computing architecture that makes modern AI possible — a platform that enables researchers to train large models, simulate physical systems and advance science at unprecedented scale and speed. AI is driving a new industrial revolution in the U.S. and across the world. The Genesis Mission is expected to expand and accelerate that revolution. NVIDIA GTC Berlin Registration Is Now Open October 20-22 Register Now Recent News AI Sparks Fly: NVIDIA Accelerates Local AI at IFA 2026 September 3, 2026 Gaming ‘NBA 2K27’ With NVIDIA DLSS 5 Leads 28 New Games Coming to GeForce NOW September 3, 2026 Corporate NVIDIA to Acquire Hugging Face September 3, 2026 AI NVIDIA and CrowdStrike Strengthen Agentic Cybersecurity Frontier September 1, 2026 View All Recent News Categories: Corporate Tags: Artificial Intelligence Energy Healthcare and Life Sciences High-Performance Computing Quantum Computing Science Related News AI Sparks Fly: NVIDIA Accelerates Local AI at IFA 2026 Sep 3, 2026 Corporate NVIDIA to Acquire Hugging Face Sep 3, 2026 AI Universitas Gadjah Mada, Indosat and NVIDIA Open Indonesia’s First University AI Center to Develop Local AI Talent Aug 14, 2026 AI NVIDIA and Local AI Community Fuel Open Source Models and Intelligent Agents Aug 11, 2026 Share This Facebook LinkedIn Share on Mastodon Enter your Mastodon instance URL (optional) Share 