 Interior Highlights Scientific Leadership Supporting the Genesis Mission | U.S. Department of the Interior Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. America250 Newsroom Accessibility Menu Toggle Font Size Toggle OpenDyslexic Toggle Dyslexia-friendly black-on-creme color scheme Contact Us U.S. Department of the Interior Menu About About Interior Interior Leadership Meet the Secretary Departmental Offices History of the Interior Join Careers Pathways Program Veterans Employment Volunteer Bureaus Bureaus Bureaus Bureau of Indian Affairs Bureau of Indian Education Bureau of Land Management Bureau of Ocean Energy Management Bureau of Reclamation Bureau of Safety & Environmental Enforcement Bureau of Trust Funds Administration National Park Service Office of Surface Mining Reclamation & Enforcement U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service U.S. Geological Survey Media Media Blog Press Releases Media Contacts Multimedia Search America250 Newsroom Accessibility Menu Toggle Font Size Toggle OpenDyslexic Toggle Dyslexia-friendly black-on-creme color scheme Contact Us Breadcrumb Home Interior Highlights Scientific Leadership Suppo... Share Facebook LinkedIn Reddit Pinterest X (formerly Twitter) Interior Highlights Scientific Leadership Supporting the Genesis Mission Department investments in AI-enabled science, water, energy and critical minerals strengthen America's technological leadership 07/22/2026 Last edited 07/22/2026 Contact Information interior_press@ios.doi.gov WASHINGTON — The U.S. Department of the Interior today highlighted its extensive contributions to the Genesis Mission, a government-wide initiative led by the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy that harnesses artificial intelligence to accelerate scientific discovery, strengthen American Energy Dominance and bolster national security. Through the U.S. Geological Survey, Bureau of Reclamation, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, National Park Service, Bureau of Land Management and other bureaus, the Department generates and stewards authoritative scientific data that underpins the Genesis Mission's artificial intelligence capabilities. Across water resources, critical minerals, biological systems and subsurface energy resources, Interior's monitoring networks, resource assessments and scientific research provide the data needed to train, validate and deploy advanced AI models at a national scale. In fiscal years 2025 and 2026, the Department will direct approximately $110 million toward data and research supporting the Genesis Mission, across the new National Science and Technology Challenges the White House announced earlier today. Approximately $405 million remains actively supporting ongoing scientific research and data collection. "President Trump has made clear that America must lead the world in artificial intelligence, scientific innovation and energy production," said Secretary of the Interior Doug Burgum . "The Department of the Interior is providing the scientific foundation that makes that leadership possible. From mapping critical mineral resources and improving water forecasting to advancing AI-enabled geologic research and biological science, our world-class scientists and data systems are helping ensure the United States has the knowledge, resources and infrastructure needed to win the global race for AI while strengthening our energy security and economic prosperity." Interior's contributions align with four National Science and Technology Challenges where the Department is uniquely positioned to lead: Securing America's Critical Minerals Supply through geologic mapping, mineral assessments and AI-enabled resource analysis that support domestic critical mineral development. Unleashing Subsurface Strategic Energy Assets through geologic, geophysical and seismic data that support advanced modeling of the Nation's underground energy resources. Predicting U.S. Water for Energy by supplying hydrologic data, drought forecasting, reservoir operations science and water reuse research that improve water management and energy resilience. Scaling Biology for American Industrial Leadership by providing genetic, ecological and biodiversity data that enable AI-driven biological research, ecosystem science and biotechnology innovation. The Department's work supports the Genesis Mission's whole-of-government approach to applying artificial intelligence across science and engineering disciplines to accelerate discovery, modernize infrastructure and strengthen America's long-term competitiveness. Leaders from across the federal government, industry and academia will discuss these efforts during the Genesis Mission Summit on July 22 in Washington, D.C. The Department of the Interior remains committed to advancing the Administration's priorities by delivering the scientific information, resource assessments and technological capabilities necessary to support American energy dominance, responsible resource development and continued U.S. leadership in artificial intelligence and scientific innovation. Press Release 08/19/2026 Record $24M in Winning Bids for Utah Geothermal Leases This week, the Bureau of Land Management set records for the bureau’s highest parcel bid at $4,168,725 and highest per-acre bid at $1,207 and was the second largest lease sale in total dollars in the Bureau’s history. Read more Press Release 08/12/2026 Interior Advances American Energy Dominance with Third Gulf of America Lease Sale The Department of the Interior today announced that the Marine Minerals Administration’s Lease Sale Big Beautiful Gulf 3, or BBG3, generated $82,689,756 in high bids for 59 blocks in federal waters of the Gulf of America. Sixteen companies submitted 69 bids totaling $99,476,285. Read more Press Release 08/03/2026 Department of the Interior Proposes Targeted Updates to Arctic Exploratory Drilling Rule to Advance… The Department of the Interior today announced a proposed rule through the Marine Minerals Administration to modernize and refine federal regulations governing exploratory oil and gas drilling on the Arctic Outer Continental Shelf, advancing President Donald J. Trump’s commitment to unleash American Energy Dominance while maintaining strong safety and environmental oversight. Read more Was this page helpful? Yes No This page was not helpful because the content: Please provide a comment Leave this field blank Return to top Footer About DOI Accessibility Contact Us Copyright Disclaimer Information Quality Footer - Secondary Budget & Performance Cummings Act Notices FOIA Hearings and Appeals Case Inventories Inspector General No Fear Act reports Footer - Tertiary Menu Office of Civil Rights Privacy Policy Site Map Vulnerability Disclosure Policy U.S. Department of the Interior Stewarding Conservation and Powering Our Future 1849 C Street NW, Washington, DC 20240 