 GlobalFoundries joins U.S. Department of Energy's Genesis Mission as industry partner | GlobalFoundries Skip to content GF Connect portal MIPS Atlas portal Supplier portal English 中文 (简体) Deutsch Search Technologies Technologies High-performance, power-efficient and feature-rich technologies for high-growth and emerging markets View all technologies Advanced packaging CMOS FDX™ FD-SOI Feature-rich CMOS FinFET Power BCD Power GaN Quantum technology RF RF-SOI SiGe RF GaN Silicon photonics MIPS (opens in a new tab) Resource center Markets Markets Advanced solutions designed to meet the unique needs of today’s most crucial end markets View all markets Aerospace & defense Automotive Data center & communications infrastructure Home & industrial IoT Physical AI Smart mobile devices Manufacturing Manufacturing Global footprint spanning the U.S., Europe and Asia for trusted and reliable manufacturing for customers around the world View all manufacturing Sites Malta Burlington Dresden Singapore Guangzhou Manufacturing hubs Services Advanced packaging centers GlobalShuttle™ MPW program Quality & certifications Digital manufacturing Design support Design support Comprehensive design support resources, including process design kits (PDKs), in‑house expertise and global partner networks View all design support GF Connect customer portal (opens in a new tab) MIPS Atlas portal (opens in a new tab) GlobalSolutions™ ecosystem Value-added partner program Process design kits (PDK) Resource center About GF About GF GF is a leading manufacturer of essential semiconductors, enabling AI at scale from the cloud to the physical world Company overview Leadership Innovation GF Accelerate GF Labs University partnerships Sustainability & responsibility Community impact Suppliers Public policy engagement Risk & business continuity management Contact us News & events News & events Read our latest news and insights, and explore where you can engage with us at upcoming events View all news & events News Blog Events Media contacts Media library Careers Careers Join a team that powers the world’s essential technologies View all careers Life at GF Early career Professional opportunities Recruiting & career events Where we work North America EMEA APAC Search jobs (opens in a new tab) Investors What can we help you with? Technologies Advanced packaging CMOS FDX™ FD-SOI Feature-rich CMOS FinFET View all Power BCD Power GaN View all Quantum technology RF RF-SOI SiGe RF GaN View all Silicon photonics MIPS Resource center View all technologies Markets Aerospace & defense Automotive Data center & communications infrastructure Home & industrial IoT Physical AI View all Smart mobile devices View all markets Manufacturing Sites Malta Burlington Dresden Singapore Guangzhou Manufacturing hubs View all Services Advanced packaging centers GlobalShuttle™ MPW program All services Quality & certifications Digital manufacturing View all manufacturing Design support GF Connect customer portal MIPS Atlas portal GlobalSolutions™ ecosystem Value-added partner program Process design kits (PDK) Resource center View all design support About GF Company overview Leadership Innovation GF Accelerate GF Labs University partnerships View all Sustainability & responsibility Community impact Suppliers Public policy engagement Risk & business continuity management Contact us News & events News Blog Events Media contacts Media library View all news & events Careers Life at GF Early career Professional opportunities Recruiting & career events Where we work North America EMEA APAC All locations Search jobs View all careers Investors (opens in a new tab) Login GF Connect portal MIPS Atlas portal Supplier portal Home | News & events | News | GlobalFoundries joins U.S. Department of Energy's Genesis… GlobalFoundries joins U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission as industry partner June 3, 2026 Partnership paves the way to pair AI-enabled semiconductor design with GF’s U.S. manufacturing platform to bridge the gap from research to prototype for next-generation computing initiatives MALTA, N.Y., June 3, 2026 — GlobalFoundries (Nasdaq: GFS) today announced a strategic partnership with the U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission, the department’s initiative to accelerate scientific discovery through artificial intelligence and advanced computing. Through the agreement, GF will open its U.S. manufacturing platform and design enablement resources to Genesis Mission researchers — giving the nation’s National Laboratories, universities, industry partners and startups a direct path from AI-enabled chip design to working prototype silicon. GF Labs, the company’s frontier research and development organization, will lead collaboration with the Genesis Mission. Progress in AI and advanced computing depends on more than algorithms and ideas; it depends on the ability to turn them into devices. As a semiconductor manufacturing engine accelerating America’s technology leadership, GF brings the manufacturing capacity and design enablement that connect three communities — the National Labs, universities and industry — around a shared path from concept to silicon. “American science is generating extraordinary ideas in AI and advanced computing. What’s been missing is the bridge from lab to fab,” said Tom Caulfield, executive chairman of GlobalFoundries. “By bringing our U.S. manufacturing platform, our PDKs and our multi-project wafer program to the Genesis Mission, we can give researchers a real path from concept to working silicon — and help the National Labs, universities and industry pull in the same direction.” Areas of collaboration Working through GF Labs, the partnership contemplates cooperation in several areas of mutual interest, including: AI-enabled semiconductor design Access to GF technology platforms, including process design kits, device models and design enablement resources for Genesis Mission-supported research teams. Prototype fabrication through GF’s multi-project wafer program, giving researchers a manufacturable route from design to silicon. Support for the translation of research outputs into functional prototypes and pre-commercial designs. Advancement of next-generation technologies, including silicon photonics for data centers and quantum computing for quantum-systems discovery. About the Genesis Mission The Genesis Mission is a U.S. Department of Energy initiative, led by the Under Secretary for Science, to accelerate scientific discovery through artificial intelligence and advanced computing. Industry partners contribute technical expertise, capabilities and infrastructure to advance the mission’s objectives in partnership with the national laboratories and the academic research community. About GF GlobalFoundries (GF) is a leading manufacturer of essential semiconductors, enabling AI at scale from the cloud to the physical world. Through deep partnerships with customers, GF delivers differentiated, power‑efficient and high‑performance solutions for automotive, aerospace and defense, data center, smart mobile devices, internet of things and other high‑growth markets. With global manufacturing operations across the U.S., Europe and Asia, GF is a trusted and holistic technology partner for customers around the world. GF’s talented, global team remains focused every day on security, longevity and sustainability. For more information, visit www.gf.com . © 2026 GlobalFoundries Inc. GF ® , GlobalFoundries ® , the GF logos and other GF marks are trademarks of GlobalFoundries Inc. or its subsidiaries. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Contact Kenneth Craig GlobalFoundries [email protected] #Quantum #Silicon photonics Sep 8, 2026 GlobalFoundries and U.S. Department of Commerce finalize $375M R&D award to advance American quantum leadership Learn more : GlobalFoundries and U.S. Department of Commerce finalize $375M R&D award to advance American quantum leadership Sep 2, 2026 QuantalRF samples DPD-efficient linear Wi-Fi 7 and Wi-Fi 8 FEM with up to 3dB more mask-compliant power at 160 and 320 MHz Learn more : QuantalRF samples DPD-efficient linear Wi-Fi 7 and Wi-Fi 8 FEM with up to 3dB more mask-compliant power at 160 and 320 MHz (opens in a new tab) Sep 2, 2026 GlobalFoundries announces customer availability of UX platform technologies for intelligent edge, connectivity and Physical AI applications Learn more : GlobalFoundries announces customer availability of UX platform technologies for intelligent edge, connectivity and Physical AI applications Sep 2, 2026 GlobalFoundries and RAAAM Memory Technologies announce the joint development of next-generation GCRAM technology and test chip on FDX platform Learn more : GlobalFoundries and RAAAM Memory Technologies announce the joint development of next-generation GCRAM technology and test chip on FDX platform All news GlobalFoundries (GF) is a leading manufacturer of essential semiconductors, enabling AI at scale from the cloud to the physical world. Through deep partnerships with customers, GF delivers differentiated, power‑efficient and high‑performance solutions for high‑growth markets. With global manufacturing operations across the U.S., Europe and Asia, GF is a trusted and holistic technology partner for customers around the world. GF’s talented, global team remains focused every day on security, longevity and sustainability. Company Company About GF Careers Technologies Markets Manufacturing Investors (opens in a new tab) News & events News & events News Events Blog Media library Design support Design support GF Connect portal (opens in a new tab) MIPS Atlas portal (opens in a new tab) GlobalSolutions™ ecosystem Value-added partner program Resource center Quick links Quick links Contact us Suppliers Quality & certifications Visit us on LinkedIn Visit us on X Visit us on YouTube Visit us on Facebook Visit us on Instagram Accessibility policy CCPA Intellectual property Privacy policy Terms & conditions 