 Genesis Mission Consortium U.S. Department of Energy | Genesis Mission Home Our Members Membership News & Events FAQ Partnership Exchange Create the Next Era in Science The Genesis Mission Consortium unites the nation's leading science and technology experts to solve critical challenges at unprecedented speed. Sign Up for Updates → About the Genesis Mission Consortium The Genesis Mission Consortium is the catalyst for a new era of science and technology exploration, uniting technical capabilities and expertise from the Department of Energy (DOE), National Laboratories, private-sector leaders, and academic institutions. The consortium will create a powerful engine for innovation that drives scientific breakthroughs across multiple disciplines. Featured News & Events Press Release July 22, 2026 Secretary of Energy Chris Wright Announces First Genesis Mission Projects Selected to Accelerate AI-Driven Scientific Discovery Press Release July 22, 2026 Trump Administration Announces More Than $5 Billion for the Genesis Mission, a National Mission on AI for Science Press Release July 22, 2026 U.S. Department of Energy Announces More Than $800 Million in Partner Commitments to the Genesis Mission View All News & Events → Why Join the Consortium? Build the Future of Science We're building the world's most powerful scientific AI platform, dramatically accelerating energy innovation and discovery science, while strengthening national security. You're invited to join a growing group of federal and industry organizations launching the consortium. Innovate through Collaboration This collaborative hub will harness the nation's research and development resources to expand our capabilities and drive the future of science and technology. The Genesis Mission Consortium will promote rapid innovation through collaboration in ways not previously possible. Tackle Critical Challenges Consortium members will apply these powerful resources to critical national science and technology challenges in advanced manufacturing, biotechnology, materials science, nuclear energy, quantum information science, and semiconductors. Who Should Join? The consortium will unite emerging and leading-edge organizations from the private sector and academic institutions with the mission teams at the DOE and the 17 National Laboratories to accelerate discovery and maintain America's scientific and technological leadership. Universities are also eligible for membership in the Genesis Mission Consortium. For additional information, view the University Membership document (PDF, 6 pages). How the Consortium Works The consortium will support the strategic direction of the Genesis Mission , working collaboratively to rapidly advance scientific progress. Consortium members intend to contribute computing power, AI tokens, technical expertise, or in-kind support, to advance the Genesis Mission goals and build the community. The consortium will connect leading industry and academic organizations with DOE and the National Laboratories and their resources. It will identify high-value partnerships among members that catalyze data flows and promote novel data applications. Core functions of the consortium: Working Groups Working Groups are facilitated teams focused on advancing technical priorities aligned with Genesis Mission objectives. These teams are at the center of collaborative innovation within the consortium and are critical to achieving shared goals. Structured Partnerships The consortium will provide support to identify and cultivate high-value collaboration among consortium members to pursue Genesis Mission funding and collaboration opportunities. Who Benefits from the Consortium? The Consortium Members Members are supported and positioned to drive innovation through collaborative science at the forefront of technology and scientific capability. Members will have the opportunity to collaborate and gain access to computing capabilities, data, facilities, and expertise through Project Agreements shared across members and the National Laboratories. The Research Community The consortium will identify strategic partnerships between members and non-members for select opportunities. Non-members may also pursue consortium membership in the future as the consortium continues to advance and grow. Interested individuals and entities can subscribe to Genesis Mission Consortium emails and respond to future funding calls. The Public The Genesis Mission aims to double the productivity and impact of American research within a decade. The world's most powerful scientific AI platform will deliver the benefits of world-leading technologies in advanced manufacturing, biotechnology, materials science, nuclear energy, quantum information science, and semiconductors to the American public. Working Groups The Genesis Mission Consortium will use working groups to seed and facilitate strategic, high-impact partnerships. Working groups are at the center of collaborative innovation within the consortium and are critical for achieving shared goals through pooled expertise and co-creation efforts. AI Model Development & Validation Focus: Advance foundational and domain-specific AI models for applications in energy, discovery science, and national security. Ensure rigorous model validation and reliability for scientific use cases. Data Integration & Standards Focus: Harmonize data formats, create metadata standards, and promote data interoperability across DOE labs, industry, and academic organizations. Address secure data governance and compliance standards. High-Performance Computing & Cloud Infrastructure Focus: Integrate supercomputing resources with the American Science Cloud (AmSC) to enable scalable, AI-driven research and real-time collaboration. Enable federated data sharing for rapid AI model training. Robotics & Automation Focus: Design and deploy robotics and automation systems for use in innovation labs and research facilities. Accelerate research throughput and reduce operational bottlenecks. Workforce Development & Training Focus: Define best practices for training, including AI models (both applications and limitations), data, security, and workflow integration. Define standards for internships and other experiential training. Build the future with Genesis Mission Consortium. Sign Up for Updates → The Genesis Mission Consortium is administered by RTI International (operating as TechWerx), a partnership intermediary for the U.S. Department of Energy. Contact us at: info@genesismissionconsortium.org Terms of Use Privacy Policy About Genesis Mission DOE National Labs Contact us at: info@genesismissionconsortium.org Terms of Use Privacy Policy DOE National Labs 