 Genesis Mission Consortium | Membership Interest Form U.S. Department of Energy | Genesis Mission Home Our Members Membership News & Events FAQ Partnership Exchange Membership Interest Form Thank you for your interest in the Genesis Mission Consortium. This form is intended as an expression of organizational interest in potential membership. Information collected will be shared with DOE, other federal agencies, and the Consortium team for consideration purposes. Submission of this form does not constitute a commitment, proposal, guarantee of membership, guarantee of participation in any Consortium activity, or guarantee of access to DOE, National Laboratory, or Consortium resources. Membership is subject to DOE review, execution of applicable agreements, and completion of the Genesis Mission Consortium membership process. The Consortium is intended to be a collaborative ecosystem. As part of this interest form, organizations are encouraged to describe any potential in-kind resources, expertise, capabilities, facilities, workforce programs, datasets, software, infrastructure, or other assets they may be willing to make available to support Genesis Mission objectives. 1. Organizational Information All fields are required unless marked as optional Organization Name Organization Type Industry/Private Sector Academia Nonprofit Organization FFRDC (non-DOE) Other Organization Size (staff count, revenue, or other relevant descriptor) Organization Website Address Country of Incorporation Does your organization have any foreign ownership, controlling interest, or significant foreign influence? Yes No Is this submission on behalf of the organization as a whole or a specific team, program, center, campus, school, or business unit? Organization as a whole Specific team / program / business unit / campus / school / center Organization Description Describe any prior experience working with DOE, DOE National Laboratories, or other federal R&D organizations. 2. Contact Information Primary Point of Contact Full Name Title/Role Email Address Phone Number + Add Secondary Point of Contact 3. Alignment with the Genesis Mission How does your organization's mission or expertise align with the objectives of the Genesis Mission? What unique capabilities, assets, expertise, partnerships, or institutional resources could your organization potentially contribute to the Genesis Mission ecosystem and other Consortium members? 4. Proposed Areas of Contribution Please describe potential in-kind contributions your organization could make available to support the Genesis Mission and Consortium activities. We are particularly interested in understanding what resources, capabilities, assets, expertise, facilities, programs, or services your organization could contribute to the Genesis Mission ecosystem. Contributions described here are non-binding and intended only for initial evaluation. Potential In-Kind Contributions (select all that apply): Computing infrastructure, cloud, or HPC resources Data assets, repositories, or data infrastructure AI models, software, workflows, or digital tools Experimental facilities, laboratories, instrumentation, or testbeds Scientific, engineering, technical, or research expertise Workforce development, education, training, internships, or fellowships Financial or in-kind support Standards development, best practices, or community leadership Other (please describe) Describe the proposed in-kind contributions, why they may be significant, and how they could advance Genesis Mission priorities or provide value to Consortium members. Provide an indicative non-binding estimate of scale (e.g., staff effort, facility access, dataset size, compute resources, training slots, equipment availability, or other relevant measures) for the contribution, if known. 5. Organization Needs and Wants What are you hoping to receive from DOE/Genesis Mission? 6. Ideas, Concepts, or Project Interests (Optional) Do you have initial ideas, concepts, or project areas that could support Genesis Mission objectives? 7. Additional Information (Optional) Is there anything else you would like DOE or the Consortium team to know about your organization or interest in the Genesis Mission Consortium? I acknowledge that submission of this form does not guarantee membership, participation, selection for any Consortium activity, access to DOE/National Laboratory/Consortium resources, funding, or working group participation. I acknowledge that information submitted may be shared with DOE, other federal agencies, and the Consortium team for review and consideration purposes. I acknowledge that any potential membership or contribution will be subject to DOE review, applicable due diligence, execution of required agreements, and completion of the Genesis Mission Consortium membership process. I acknowledge that proposed contributions described in this form are for initial review and discussion and do not create a binding obligation unless and until reflected in applicable membership or project agreements. Submit → The Genesis Mission Consortium is administered by RTI International (operating as TechWerx), a partnership intermediary for the U.S. Department of Energy. Contact us at: info@genesismissionconsortium.org Terms of Use Privacy Policy About Genesis Mission DOE National Labs Contact us at: info@genesismissionconsortium.org Terms of Use Privacy Policy DOE National Labs 