 The Collaboration Skip to main content CERN Accelerating science Sign in Directory Collaboration Site | Physics Results Main navigation Toggle navigation About Discover Detector Long Shutdown 2 Physics Collaboration Management Awards Join ATLAS Join as a Clustered Institution Join as a Technical Associate Institute Join as an Associate Institute Join as an Institution Visit Resources Press Run 3 Resources Updates All All Search News News Search Briefings Briefings Search Features Features Search Portraits Portraits Search Profiles Profiles Search Press Press Search Blog Blog Search SEARCH Enter the terms you wish to search for. Search Search Search Discover submenu Detector Physics Collaboration Visit Long Shutdown 2 Feedback The Collaboration ATLAS is one of the largest collaborative efforts ever attempted in science. Organisational Structure ATLAS is a collaboration of physicists, engineers, technicians, students and support staff from around the world. It is one of the largest collaborative efforts ever attempted in science, with over 5500 members and 3000 scientific authors. The success of ATLAS relies on the close collaboration of research teams located at CERN, and at member universities and laboratories worldwide. ATLAS elects its leadership and has an organisational structure that allows teams to self-manage, and members to be directly involved in decision-making processes. Scientists usually work in small groups, choosing the research areas and data that interest them most. Any output from the collaboration is shared by all members and is subject to rigorous review and fact-checking processes before results are made public. The success of the collaboration is bound by individual commitment to physics and the prospect of exciting new results that can only be achieved with a complete and coherent collaborative effort. The only way to realise such a challenging project, with the required intellectual and financial resources, and to maximise its scientific output is through international collaboration. Large project funds are investments from funding agencies of countries participating in ATLAS. There are also contributions from CERN, and some resources from individual universities. 3000 Scientific authors 170+ Institutions 40 Countries 1200 Doctoral students ATLAS Institutes Caption : Blue markers indicate ATLAS institutes (click for information, double-click for zoom). Use mouse wheel or buttons to zoom. See the full list of ATLAS institutions here. ATLAS Management The ATLAS management team is responsible for overseeing all the aspects of the collaboration. It is led by a Spokesperson , who has the overall responsibility of the day-to-day organisation of ATLAS. Supporting the Spokesperson is one or two Deputy Spokespersons , whose responsibilities are defined by the Spokesperson. The team also includes a Technical Coordinator , who monitors the overall technical aspects of the experiment; a Resource Coordinator , responsible for the financial and human resources of the collaboration; and an Upgrade Coordinator , responsible for overseeing and monitoring the ATLAS upgrades. The ATLAS Collaboration Board elects its Spokesperson every two years and the position is renewable once (two election terms). Discover the management team Collaboration membership Career Opportunities ATLAS Awards --> Info Press | Visit | Jobs Collaboration membership Glossary Logo & design guidelines Diversity & Inclusion Collaboration Site Physics Results Follow Contact ATLAS Experiment, CERN CH-1211 Geneva 23 Switzerland Inquiries Organisational chart ATLAS Experiment © 2026 CERN 