 NSF partners with Micron and GlobalFoundries to invest in semiconductor workforce development at minority-serving institutions | NSF - U.S. National Science Foundation Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS. A lock ( Lock Locked padlock ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Menu Search search Find Funding Funding Search Award Search NSF-wide Initiatives Research Experiences for Undergraduates Where to Start For Everyone For Early-Career Researchers For Postdoctoral Fellows For Graduate Students For Undergraduates For Industry For Entrepreneurs How to Apply Preparing Your Proposal Submitting Your Proposal Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) Additional Resources Research.gov Grants.gov How We Make Funding Decisions Manage Your Award Getting Started Request a Change to Your Award Report Your Outcomes Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) Additional Resources Research.gov NSF Public Access Repository Who to Contact With Questions Focus Areas Major Initiatives Artificial Intelligence Biotechnology Quantum STEM Workforce Focus Areas Explore All Focus Areas Arctic and Antarctic Astronomy and Space Biology Chemistry Computing Earth and Environment Education and Training Engineering Facilities and Infrastructure Materials Research Mathematics People and Society Physics Research Partnerships Technology News & Events News & Announcements NSF Impacts Science Matters Blog For the Press Upcoming Events About About NSF Careers at NSF Updates on NSF Priorities Contact Us Our Directorates & Offices How NSF Is Organized Biological Sciences (BIO) Computer & Information Science & Engineering (CISE) Engineering (ENG) Geosciences (GEO) Integrative Activities (OIA) International Science & Engineering (OISE) Mathematical & Physical Sciences (MPS) Social, Behavioral & Economic Sciences (SBE) STEM Education (EDU) Technology, Innovation & Partnerships (TIP) National Center for Science & Engineering Statistics (NCSES) National Science Board (NSB) Home News NSF partners with Micron and GlobalFoundries to invest in semiconductor workforce development at minority-serving institutions Print this Page Archived content In an effort to keep NSF.gov current, the archive contains older information that may not reflect current policy or programs. View image credit & caption NSF News NSF partners with Micron and GlobalFoundries to invest in semiconductor workforce development at minority-serving institutions May 21, 2024 Today, the U.S. National Science Foundation announced a new partnership with Micron Technology, Inc., and GlobalFoundries (GF) to increase access to equitable education and develop the next generation of a diverse, semiconductor-ready science, technology, engineering, and mathematics workforce. NSF, together with Micron and GF, will invest in semiconductor workforce development at minority-serving institutions (MSIs) such as historically Black colleges and universities, Hispanic-serving institutions, and Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander-serving Institutions nationwide to diversify the semiconductor workforce and build robust talent pathways through education and career reentry initiatives. "Partnering with leaders in industry, government and education to meet the needs of a growing semiconductor workforce in the U.S. is an essential part of nurturing the talent necessary to fill key openings in the semiconductor industry," said Erwin Gianchandani, NSF assistant director for Technology, Innovation and Partnerships. "We look forward to collaborating with our partners to increase access to equitable education, address student programming and teacher and faculty professional development and strengthen infrastructure through future funding opportunities." “Micron’s investments in U.S. expansion are about much more than building fabs. We’re investing in people and in partnerships to expose learners from every background to opportunities they may not otherwise have without support,” said April Arnzen, executive vice president and chief people officer at Micron and president of the Micron Foundation. “We’re honored to see initiatives like Micron’s MSI Semiconductor Network, which are at the forefront of our industry’s efforts to prepare the semiconductor workforce and research ecosystem to meet growing demand for talent, recognized by government leaders in the U.S. and globally.” “As an industry, we must work together to collectively address the great need for a robust, diverse pipeline of talented individuals who will be the semiconductor innovators and leaders of tomorrow,” said Pradheepa Raman, chief people officer of GlobalFoundries. “Strong public-private partnerships, like our collaboration with Micron and NSF to support Minority Serving Institutions, are critical to continue the work of inspiring and developing the skilled workforce our industry needs to grow.” Today's announcement is just the latest in a series of NSF programs offering new pathways for individuals from all backgrounds and experiences to gain on-the-job training in technologies critical to the nation's long-term competitiveness. Last fall, NSF announced the first Experiential Learning for Emerging and Novel Technologies investment of $18.8 million to 27 teams at U.S. institutions of higher education, including teams led by MSIs and HBCUs. NSF also unveiled 24 research and education projects with a total investment of $45.6 million — including support from Ericsson, IBM, Intel and Samsung — last September that are enabling rapid progress in new semiconductor technologies and manufacturing and workforce development. Today's partnership also expands upon other recent NSF investments to train and build a diverse semiconductor manufacturing workforce in the U.S. Since 2022, NSF has announced a partnership with the Semiconductor Research Corporation, a $10 million funding opportunity with Intel Corporation and several collaborations with Micron, such as this $10 million funding opportunity . Research areas Directorate for Technology, Innovation and Partnerships (TIP) Topics Education Engineering Mathematics Semiconductors & Microelectronics Technology Share Share on Facebook Share on X (formerly known as Twitter) Share on LinkedIn Email Related stories Podcast: AI and wearable devices Podcast: Lasers and materials of the future NSF launches three new Science and Technology Centers with $90M investment in transformative research Top Publication date: May 21, 2024 Last updated: August 25, 2025 Randolph Building 401 Dulany Street Alexandria, VA 22314 (703) 292-5111 Sign up for email updates Footer About Us About NSF Careers Our Directorates & Offices National Science Board Contact Us What's New News & Announcements Events Science Matters Blog Information For Funding Seekers NSF Awardees Congress Media Educators Panelists Resources Documents & Reports Budget, Performance & Financial Reporting Public Access Stopping Harassment Research Security Scientific Integrity Research.gov Required Policy Links Vulnerability disclosure Inspector General Privacy FOIA No FEAR Act USA.gov Accessibility Plain language 