 Unleashing a new age of AI-enabled scientific discovery through the Genesis Mission | NSF - U.S. National Science Foundation Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS. A lock ( Lock Locked padlock ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Menu Search search Find Funding Funding Search Award Search NSF-wide Initiatives Research Experiences for Undergraduates Where to Start For Everyone For Early-Career Researchers For Postdoctoral Fellows For Graduate Students For Undergraduates For Industry For Entrepreneurs How to Apply Preparing Your Proposal Submitting Your Proposal Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) Additional Resources Research.gov Grants.gov How We Make Funding Decisions Manage Your Award Getting Started Request a Change to Your Award Report Your Outcomes Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) Additional Resources Research.gov NSF Public Access Repository Who to Contact With Questions Focus Areas Major Initiatives Artificial Intelligence Biotechnology Quantum STEM Workforce Focus Areas Explore All Focus Areas Arctic and Antarctic Astronomy and Space Biology Chemistry Computing Earth and Environment Education and Training Engineering Facilities and Infrastructure Materials Research Mathematics People and Society Physics Research Partnerships Technology News & Events News & Announcements NSF Impacts Science Matters Blog For the Press Upcoming Events About About NSF Careers at NSF Updates on NSF Priorities Contact Us Our Directorates & Offices How NSF Is Organized Biological Sciences (BIO) Computer & Information Science & Engineering (CISE) Engineering (ENG) Geosciences (GEO) Integrative Activities (OIA) International Science & Engineering (OISE) Mathematical & Physical Sciences (MPS) Social, Behavioral & Economic Sciences (SBE) STEM Education (EDU) Technology, Innovation & Partnerships (TIP) National Center for Science & Engineering Statistics (NCSES) National Science Board (NSB) Home Funding at NSF Funding Search Unleashing a new age of AI-enabled scientific discovery through the Genesis Mission Print this Page Important information for proposers and award recipients All proposals must be submitted in accordance with the requirements specified in the funding opportunity and in the Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) and its supplements . All NSF grants and cooperative agreements are subject to the applicable set of NSF award terms and conditions . NSF has updated its research security policies for NSF funded projects. Dear Colleague Letter Unleashing a new age of AI-enabled scientific discovery through the Genesis Mission Invites proposal submissions to invest in AI-enabled scientific discovery and foundational research in support of the Genesis Mission National Science and Technology Challenges and Platform. July 22, 2026 Invites proposal submissions to invest in AI-enabled scientific discovery and foundational research in support of the Genesis Mission National Science and Technology Challenges and Platform. Dear Colleague: With this Dear Colleague Letter (DCL), the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) encourages proposal submissions for AI-enabled scientific discovery and foundational research in support of the Genesis Mission , a dedicated, coordinated national effort to accelerate the application of AI for transformative scientific discovery, focused on pressing national science and technology challenges. NSF is interested in receiving proposals that respond to existing NSF funding opportunities and support the Genesis Mission. Background As AI becomes an increasingly important element of scientific discovery and economic growth, the United States Government recognizes the need to invest in AI-enabled science to accelerate scientific advancement. On November 24, 2025, the Genesis Mission was created through Executive Order 14363: “Launching the Genesis Mission” . The Department of Energy (DOE) is charged with implementing the initiative, comprising two major pillars: The American Science and Security Platform (“Platform”) , which will connect the world’s best supercomputers, experimental facilities, AI systems, and unique datasets across every major scientific domain and serve as a state-of-the-art enabling tool for DOE and Genesis Mission partners. National Science and Technology (S&T) Challenges , which will demonstrate how AI can turbocharge scientific discovery and technological development to deliver continued U.S. leadership in science, technology, and national security. DOE has released an initial focused set of 26 National S&T Challenges , covering areas of interest to DOE. This list will be expanded in Summer 2026 to incorporate new challenges and collaboration from other Federal agencies. NSF is uniquely positioned to contribute to the Genesis Mission, having long supported fundamental research that has both advanced the field of AI as well as the range of scientific research in other fields that can be turbocharged through the use of AI. This DCL encourages proposal submissions focused on advancing research and development crucial to scientific progress in the context of Genesis-relevant priorities and foci. Proposal Submission NSF encourages proposals that support the Genesis Mission to be submitted to current open NSF funding opportunities. NSF is particularly interested in: Leveraging and Building AI for Science. Proposals that leverage AI for science or seek to build the foundations for AI-accelerated scientific discovery, including research that (a) leverages AI-driven workflows through autonomous or semi-autonomous laboratories, such as process optimization and intelligent experimentation, from biology to chemistry to materials science and beyond; (b) leverages AI models in combination with novel scientific datasets, which may integrate domain knowledge, mechanistic models, physical constraints, scientific literature, and reasoning to enable hypothesis generation and discovery across scientific domains; and (c) seeks to answer ambitious scientific questions across disciplines which are within reach due to emerging AI capabilities. Building Foundations for S&T Challenges. Proposals for foundational research that support one or more of the Genesis Mission National Science and Technology Challenges referenced above. Qualifying proposals to this DCL include all early-stage, fundamental research that would advance one or more National S&T Challenges. This may include research that does not itself leverage AI, but nonetheless supports the scientific activities described in the “AI Solution” section of a published challenge. Growing Workforce and Capacity in AI for Science. Proposals that advance workforce and capacity-building initiatives in AI for science, particularly, but not limited to, research fellowship programs with industry cost-share and which involve hands-on technical training at Federal R&D facilities. Principal investigators are asked to title proposals specifically responsive to this DCL with the “Genesis Mission:“ prefix followed by any applicable guidance in the open funding opportunities. Applicants are strongly encouraged to engage with partners from industry, nonprofits, national laboratories, and other organizations, as permissible by the eligibility criteria and guidelines for specific funding opportunities, to strengthen project outcomes. Awarded projects will be eligible to apply for resources through the National AI Research Resource and the Genesis Mission platform. NSF is excited to support investigators in building portfolios that contribute to the impact of the Genesis Mission. The DCL also aims to advance America’s AI Action Plan by building American innovation and infrastructure capability and capacity ensuring that American AI remains the gold standard for AI worldwide. Questions about this DCL should be directed to GenesisMissionNSF@nsf.gov . Proposals must meet all the requirements of the corresponding funding opportunities to which they are submitted, including eligibility, applicable deadlines and budget guidelines. Sincerely, Simon Malcomber Chief Science Officer U.S. National Science Foundation Organizations Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO) Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Directorate for STEM Education (EDU) Directorate for Engineering (ENG) Directorate for Geosciences (GEO) Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE) This document contains information about an active funding opportunity. Publication number: NSF 26-023 Share Share on Facebook Share on X (formerly known as Twitter) Share on LinkedIn Email Top Publication date: July 22, 2026 Last updated: August 18, 2026 Randolph Building 401 Dulany Street Alexandria, VA 22314 (703) 292-5111 Sign up for email updates Footer About Us About NSF Careers Our Directorates & Offices National Science Board Contact Us What's New News & Announcements Events Science Matters Blog Information For Funding Seekers NSF Awardees Congress Media Educators Panelists Resources Documents & Reports Budget, Performance & Financial Reporting Public Access Stopping Harassment Research Security Scientific Integrity Research.gov Required Policy Links Vulnerability disclosure Inspector General Privacy FOIA No FEAR Act USA.gov Accessibility Plain language 