 Technology — Diraq 0 Skip to Content Technology Research & Insights About News Contact Open Menu Close Menu Technology Research & Insights About News Contact Open Menu Close Menu Technology Research & Insights About News Contact Technology The most powerful, cost-effective quantum computing // UTILITY-SCALE QUANTUM COMPUTERS Diraq’s edge Diraq’s silicon spin-qubit technology is designed to be integrated into standard data centers. It runs on a single quantum chip, packaged together with classical electronics that operate at cryogenic temperatures, connected to supporting electronics at room temperature. Scalable Diraq’s roadmap charts a course to millions of qubits by 2031, and tens of millions by 2033. Only silicon puts millions of qubits on a single chip by leveraging the processes of the trillion-dollar microchip industry. Economical Diraq’s computers will cost less than a dollar per qubit. Only silicon can minimize operating costs by confining quantum operations to one compact, energy-efficient unit. Deployable Diraq’s computers will be compatible with standard data centers, making them fully adaptable to users’ needs. Only silicon delivers a quantum processing unit the size of a single server rack, boasting easy integration with high-performance classical computers. Powerful Diraq’s utility-scale computers will be capable of performing one million error-corrected operations per minute. Only silicon leverages physical phenomena that are unique to electron spins to achieve rapid logical operations. // PHASE 1 10 QUBITS 2022 to 2025 Accelerate development of in-house capabilities and launch fabrication of foundry devices. // ROADMAP The trajectory to utility scale // PHASE 2 1K+ QUBITS 2025 to 2029 Massive scale-up of foundry manufacture and targeted early-value applications. // PHASE 3 1M+ QUBITS 2029 onwards Implementation of commercially valuable algorithms with utility-scale quantum computers. Learn more about our technology and the opportunities available for investors, partners and prospective team members. Get in touch Technology Publications About News Contact Global Locations Australia United States Follow us Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy 