 About — Diraq 0 Skip to Content Technology Research & Insights About News Contact Open Menu Close Menu Technology Research & Insights About News Contact Open Menu Close Menu Technology Research & Insights About News Contact About us Diraq is building quantum computers that scale. Diraq's mission is to become the leading global provider of quantum computing hardware by building affordable quantum computers that can be deployed at scale, unlocking the next era of scientific discovery, from life-saving medicines to transformative new materials. Our approach is different: we turn transistors into qubits using existing semiconductor foundries. While competitors require custom, expensive manufacturing, Diraq leverages the same CMOS fabrication technology that produces every computer chip today. This means we can put millions of qubits on a single chip, at a fraction of the cost, while remaining exceptionally powerful. Founded by world-leading researchers and engineers in Sydney, Australia, Diraq is rapidly growing in the United States. The company partners with leading technologists and foundries including NVIDIA, Dell Technologies, GlobalFoundries, and imec, and is one of only 11 companies globally selected for Stage B of DARPA’s Quantum Benchmarking Initiative (QBI). Read more about how we are making computers quantum. // OUR LOCATIONS Diraq’s 130+ team brings together the world's best quantum talent with operations in Australia and the United States. Global locations / AUSTRALIA Sydney, NSW Australia Head Office Manufacturing & Cryo-test Facilities Melbourne, VIC Technology Hub / UNITED STATES Palo Alto, California U.S. Head Office Los Angeles, California Cryo-Test Facility Chicago, Illinois Technology Hub // LEADERSHIP Leadership team Andrew Dzurak CEO and Founder Bio Andrew Dzurak is CEO and Founder of Diraq, driving corporate strategy and leading the technological development of silicon-based quantum computing. He is also a globally recognised quantum physicist and engineer with a PhD from the University of Cambridge, decades of pioneering research at UNSW, more than 200 research publications (over 40 in Nature journals), more than 20,000 citations, and h-index above 70. Stefanie Tardo Chief Operating Officer Bio Stef Tardo is Chief Operating Officer at Diraq, where she drives strategy, business operations and fundraising to scale and strengthen the foundations underpinning Diraq’s growth. Stef leverages her deep expertise in strategic leadership and deal execution to transform complex opportunities from concept to execution, delivering meaningful impact and value. Lasantha Thennakoon Chief Financial Officer Bio Lasantha Thennakoon is CFO at Diraq, leading the finance and governance. He brings over 25 years’ international leadership in finance and strategy with deep expertise across strategic financial planning, business transformation, banking & financial services, start-ups and PE to support Diraq’s growth and long-term vision. Senior management Stephen Bartlett Senior Advisor - Quantum Architectures Stephen Bartlett is Senior Advisor - Quantum Architectures at Diraq. A theoretical quantum physicist and Professor in the School of Physics at the University of Sydney, Stephen is a globally recognised leader in quantum error correction and fault-tolerant quantum computing. Chris Escott Head of Engineering Chris Escott is Head of Engineering at Diraq, leading a talented team to deliver the company’s vision of scalable quantum computing. He brings extensive experience in leadership, project management, and innovation across complex, high-growth technology environments. Arne Laucht Head of Technical Partnerships Arne Laucht is the Head of Technical Partnerships at Diraq and a Scientia A/ Professor for Quantum Engineering in the School of Electrical Engineering & Telecommunications at UNSW Sydney. He is an expert in spin physics and quantum measurements with over 90 journal publications. He plays a key role in advancing Diraq’s mission to deliver scalable quantum computing. Wee Han Lim Head of Measurement & Fabrication Wee Han Lim is Head of Measurement and Fabrication at Diraq, leading a highly skilled team focused on silicon qubit device design, fabrication and measurements. With over 15 years of experience in silicon fabrication and cryogenic measurements, he plays a key role in advancing Diraq’s scalable quantum technology. Andre Saraiva Head of Theory & Product Development Andre Saraiva is Head of Theory and Product Development at Diraq with 20 years’ experience in solid-state physics. He has supported silicon-based quantum computing globally, working directly with qubit makers across four continents. Henry Yang Research Program Director Henry Yang is Research Program Director at Diraq and Associate Professor at UNSW, overseeing research collaborations and leading efforts in device control and measurement. He is a pioneer experimentalist in silicon MOS-based quantum computing, advancing Diraq’s mission to deliver scalable quantum technology. // DIRECTORS Board Scott A. McGregor Chairman Bio Scott A. McGregor is Chair of Diraq’s Board. A seasoned technology executive, As CEO of Broadcom, Scott delivered a decade of global growth and scale. Prior to that he held leadership roles at Philips Semiconductors and Microsoft. Scott brings deep expertise commercialising semiconductor technologies and building companies for large-scale international markets. Andrew Dzurak Diraq Bio Andrew Dzurak is CEO and Founder of Diraq, driving corporate strategy and leading the technological development of silicon-based quantum computing. He is a globally recognised quantum physicist and engineer with a PhD from the University of Cambridge and decades of pioneering research at UNSW. Jason Cheong ICM Limited Bio Jason Cheong is a Director of Diraq, appointed as investor director for Allectus Quantum Limited. He invests across the capital spectrum on behalf of ICM and its funds and was the founding portfolio manager of ICM’s technology investment vertical, Allectus. Jason brings over 15 years’ experience in venture capital, private equity, M&A and corporate law. William Jeffrey UNSW Bio Bill Jeffrey has decades of experience in driving technology innovation and commercialization. He is cofounder of Airstream Ventures Partners (a deep technology venture capital firm), was CEO of two internationally known research institutions, and was a senior official in the United States government. Christophe Jurczak Quantonation Bio Dr. Jurczak has held government and executive positions in energy, defense and in the emerging field of quantum computing, in Europe and in the US, before co-founding Quantonation Ventures in 2018. Christophe has been selected among the 20 Influential Individuals in Quantum Tech by Quantum Zeitgeist. // DIRAQ'S STATS Money raised $140M+ Employees 130 + Offices 5 Patents 60 + Papers published 200 + Nature & Science journals 40 + Learn more about our technology and the opportunities available for investors, partners and prospective team members. Get in touch Technology Publications About News Contact Global Locations Australia United States Follow us Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy 