 New NSF initiative aims to unlock dataset value for AI-enabled scientific discovery | NSF - U.S. National Science Foundation Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS. A lock ( Lock Locked padlock ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Menu Search search Find Funding Funding Search Award Search NSF-wide Initiatives Research Experiences for Undergraduates Where to Start For Everyone For Early-Career Researchers For Postdoctoral Fellows For Graduate Students For Undergraduates For Industry For Entrepreneurs How to Apply Preparing Your Proposal Submitting Your Proposal Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) Additional Resources Research.gov Grants.gov How We Make Funding Decisions Manage Your Award Getting Started Request a Change to Your Award Report Your Outcomes Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) Additional Resources Research.gov NSF Public Access Repository Who to Contact With Questions Focus Areas Major Initiatives Artificial Intelligence Biotechnology Quantum STEM Workforce Focus Areas Explore All Focus Areas Arctic and Antarctic Astronomy and Space Biology Chemistry Computing Earth and Environment Education and Training Engineering Facilities and Infrastructure Materials Research Mathematics People and Society Physics Research Partnerships Technology News & Events News & Announcements NSF Impacts Science Matters Blog For the Press Upcoming Events About About NSF Careers at NSF Updates on NSF Priorities Contact Us Our Directorates & Offices How NSF Is Organized Biological Sciences (BIO) Computer & Information Science & Engineering (CISE) Engineering (ENG) Geosciences (GEO) Integrative Activities (OIA) International Science & Engineering (OISE) Mathematical & Physical Sciences (MPS) Social, Behavioral & Economic Sciences (SBE) STEM Education (EDU) Technology, Innovation & Partnerships (TIP) National Center for Science & Engineering Statistics (NCSES) National Science Board (NSB) Home News New NSF initiative aims to unlock dataset value for AI-enabled scientific discovery Print this Page View image credit NSF News New NSF initiative aims to unlock dataset value for AI-enabled scientific discovery The program will help research communities enhance datasets to accelerate discovery in national priority areas. July 22, 2026 The U.S. National Science Foundation announced the NSF Unlocking Dataset Value for AI-Enabled Scientific Discovery program , a new investment to advance scientific community datasets and enable discovery and innovation using artificial intelligence and other methods in national priority areas. Across science and engineering, researchers have built valuable datasets through prior research. However, many datasets have the potential to be used for new inquiries outside of the initial scope of data collection, but are not accessible, interoperable or ready to be used by automated AI systems. Many existing datasets also lack a way for a broad array of researchers to contribute and benefit. The new program will help research communities unlock more value from datasets to ask new questions, test new ideas and extend the value of prior scientific investments. AI enables data processing and analysis at scales and speeds beyond human capacity, helping researchers identify previously hidden patterns and relationships. When paired with scientific datasets that are trusted, accessible, fit for their scientific purpose and curated, AI can advance scientific research and connect previously siloed disciplines. Rather than primarily supporting new data collection, the program focuses on increasing the value of existing scientific datasets and enabling new AI-driven insights, interdisciplinary research and investigations. Projects may develop novel methods for feature extraction, metadata generation and the integration of multiple datasets; build robust data pipelines for automated analysis by AI tools and systems; and more. Researchers are encouraged to leverage existing resources, including NSF data platforms, the NSF Integrated Data Systems and Services program, the NSF-led National AI Research Resource , and the American Science and Security Platform built by DOE as part of the White House-led Genesis Mission. "High-quality scientific data are foundational to advancing an AI-enabled research and innovation ecosystem," said Ellen Zegura, senior science and engineering advisor in the NSF Office of the Director. "By helping research communities unlock the value of existing data, we can accelerate breakthroughs, drive innovation and strengthen America’s global leaderships." NSF anticipates investing up to $100 million through the program, with awards ranging from $2 million to $5 million each, and planning grants of up to $200,000 each. The program aligns with America's AI Action Plan by supporting AI-enabled scientific discovery, the creation and publication of structured scientific datasets for AI model training, publicly accessible research-sharing platforms, research infrastructure and the STEM workforce of the future. These investments also complement the Genesis Mission, a national effort to harness AI for science. Established by President Trump’s Executive Order in November 2025, the Genesis Mission will build an integrated platform to harness scientific datasets to train scientific models, create AI agents to test new hypotheses, automate research workflows and accelerate scientific breakthroughs across mission-driven National Science and Technology Challenges. Learn more about NSF Unlocking High-Impact Data for AI-Enabled Scientific Discovery program . Research areas Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Share Share on Facebook Share on X (formerly known as Twitter) Share on LinkedIn Email Related stories NSF launches three new Science and Technology Centers with $90M investment in transformative research Eight NSF research institutes to propel U.S. quantum science with $290M investment NSF announces $1.5B for foundational research to drive scientific breakthroughs for American technological leadership Top Publication date: July 22, 2026 Last updated: July 23, 2026 Randolph Building 401 Dulany Street Alexandria, VA 22314 (703) 292-5111 Sign up for email updates Footer About Us About NSF Careers Our Directorates & Offices National Science Board Contact Us What's New News & Announcements Events Science Matters Blog Information For Funding Seekers NSF Awardees Congress Media Educators Panelists Resources Documents & Reports Budget, Performance & Financial Reporting Public Access Stopping Harassment Research Security Scientific Integrity Research.gov Required Policy Links Vulnerability disclosure Inspector General Privacy FOIA No FEAR Act USA.gov Accessibility Plain language 