 Unlocking Dataset Value for AI-Enabled Scientific Discovery (AI Datasets) | NSF - U.S. National Science Foundation Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS. A lock ( Lock Locked padlock ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Menu Search search Find Funding Funding Search Award Search NSF-wide Initiatives Research Experiences for Undergraduates Where to Start For Everyone For Early-Career Researchers For Postdoctoral Fellows For Graduate Students For Undergraduates For Industry For Entrepreneurs How to Apply Preparing Your Proposal Submitting Your Proposal Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) Additional Resources Research.gov Grants.gov How We Make Funding Decisions Manage Your Award Getting Started Request a Change to Your Award Report Your Outcomes Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) Additional Resources Research.gov NSF Public Access Repository Who to Contact With Questions Focus Areas Major Initiatives Artificial Intelligence Biotechnology Quantum STEM Workforce Focus Areas Explore All Focus Areas Arctic and Antarctic Astronomy and Space Biology Chemistry Computing Earth and Environment Education and Training Engineering Facilities and Infrastructure Materials Research Mathematics People and Society Physics Research Partnerships Technology News & Events News & Announcements NSF Impacts Science Matters Blog For the Press Upcoming Events About About NSF Careers at NSF Updates on NSF Priorities Contact Us Our Directorates & Offices How NSF Is Organized Biological Sciences (BIO) Computer & Information Science & Engineering (CISE) Engineering (ENG) Geosciences (GEO) Integrative Activities (OIA) International Science & Engineering (OISE) Mathematical & Physical Sciences (MPS) Social, Behavioral & Economic Sciences (SBE) STEM Education (EDU) Technology, Innovation & Partnerships (TIP) National Center for Science & Engineering Statistics (NCSES) National Science Board (NSB) Unlocking Dataset Value for AI-Enabled Scientific Discovery (AI Datasets) View guidelines NSF 26-512 View image credit Home Funding at NSF Funding Search Unlocking Dataset Value for AI-Enabled Scientific Discovery (AI Datasets) Print this Page Important information for proposers and award recipients All proposals must be submitted in accordance with the requirements specified in the funding opportunity and in the Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) and its supplements . All NSF grants and cooperative agreements are subject to the applicable set of NSF award terms and conditions . NSF has updated its research security policies for NSF funded projects. Supports unlocking the value of existing scientific datasets by making them more accessible, easier to integrate and ready for automated AI-driven analysis. Supports unlocking the value of existing scientific datasets by making them more accessible, easier to integrate and ready for automated AI-driven analysis. Synopsis This program will advance scientific community datasets to enable scientific discovery and innovation using artificial intelligence (AI) and other methods. Its goal is to increase the value that can be derived from existing scientific datasets by leveraging novel methods and artificial intelligence (AI). This will unlock new AI-driven insights. It can enable interdisciplinary research. It also enables investigations outside of the original motivation for data collection and analysis. The program seeks to 1) apply AI-based capabilities to feature extraction and metadata generation, and the integration of multiple datasets. 2) Develop robust data pipelines necessary for automated analysis of existing datasets and similar use-cases by AI tools and systems. 3) Augment and/or harmonize existing datasets to better enable use by AI data pipelines and automated analysis. Proposals should address dataset security and integrity. Governance and the process for scientific communities to contribute to the datasets should also be addressed. Proposals are encouraged to leverage existing resources. These may include NSF data platforms , the NSF Integrated Data Systems and Services program , the NSF-led National AI Research Resource , the Genesis Mission platform , or other national infrastructure. NSF is open to exploring partnerships with philanthropy, private industry, or the non-profit sector to support additional proposals or collaborative opportunities that will advance AI-driven scientific discovery through unlocking the value of high-impact scientific datasets. Expanding Participation in STEM, NSF Priorities, and Gold Standard Science: NSF prioritizes cutting-edge discovery science and engineering research, advancing technology and innovation, and creating opportunities for all Americans. NSF has established priorities set forth by Congress, the administration and the NSF director to promote NSF's mission . Proposers should review the list of NSF priorities and are encouraged to align their proposals with them, where appropriate. NSF also expects the highest standards of scientific rigor, integrity and adherence tenets of Gold Standard Science in proposals, as appropriate for the field of science and research modality. Program contacts Name Email AI Datasets Program Officers aidatasets@nsf.gov Program events Upcoming September 9, 2026 - NSF AI Datasets: Unlocking Dataset Value for AI-Enabled Scientific Discovery Awards made through this program Browse projects funded by this program Map of recent awards made through this program Organization(s) Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (CISE/OAC) Division of Computer and Network Systems (CISE/CNS) Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO) Directorate for Engineering (ENG) Directorate for Geosciences (GEO) Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) Directorate for Technology, Innovation and Partnerships (TIP) Upcoming due dates Full proposal 2026 November 4 2026 - Deadline date First Wednesday in November, Annually Thereafter Due by 5pm submitting organization's local time Program guidelines Award information Anticipated funding amount is subject to the availability of funds. Estimated number of awards 25 to 50 Estimated number of awards description - The program anticipates 10 to 20 Impact awards of up to $2,000,000. In addition, the program also anticipates 5 to 10 Flagship awards of up $5M and 10 to 20 Planning grants up to $200,000 as described in the PAPPG . Review full program guidelines and learn how to submit a proposal in the latest solicitation. Read the solicitation NSF 26-512 Share Share on Facebook Share on X (formerly known as Twitter) Share on LinkedIn Email Top Publication date: July 21, 2026 Last updated: August 1, 2026 Randolph Building 401 Dulany Street Alexandria, VA 22314 (703) 292-5111 Sign up for email updates Footer About Us About NSF Careers Our Directorates & Offices National Science Board Contact Us What's New News & Announcements Events Science Matters Blog Information For Funding Seekers NSF Awardees Congress Media Educators Panelists Resources Documents & Reports Budget, Performance & Financial Reporting Public Access Stopping Harassment Research Security Scientific Integrity Research.gov Required Policy Links Vulnerability disclosure Inspector General Privacy FOIA No FEAR Act USA.gov Accessibility Plain language 