 Extraordinary Possibility | NSF - U.S. National Science Foundation Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS. A lock ( Lock Locked padlock ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Menu Search search Find Funding Funding Search Award Search NSF-wide Initiatives Research Experiences for Undergraduates Where to Start For Everyone For Early-Career Researchers For Postdoctoral Fellows For Graduate Students For Undergraduates For Industry For Entrepreneurs How to Apply Preparing Your Proposal Submitting Your Proposal Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) Additional Resources Research.gov Grants.gov How We Make Funding Decisions Manage Your Award Getting Started Request a Change to Your Award Report Your Outcomes Proposal & Award Policies & Procedures Guide (PAPPG) Additional Resources Research.gov NSF Public Access Repository Who to Contact With Questions Focus Areas Major Initiatives Artificial Intelligence Biotechnology Quantum STEM Workforce Focus Areas Explore All Focus Areas Arctic and Antarctic Astronomy and Space Biology Chemistry Computing Earth and Environment Education and Training Engineering Facilities and Infrastructure Materials Research Mathematics People and Society Physics Research Partnerships Technology News & Events News & Announcements NSF Impacts Science Matters Blog For the Press Upcoming Events About About NSF Careers at NSF Updates on NSF Priorities Contact Us Our Directorates & Offices How NSF Is Organized Biological Sciences (BIO) Computer & Information Science & Engineering (CISE) Engineering (ENG) Geosciences (GEO) Integrative Activities (OIA) International Science & Engineering (OISE) Mathematical & Physical Sciences (MPS) Social, Behavioral & Economic Sciences (SBE) STEM Education (EDU) Technology, Innovation & Partnerships (TIP) National Center for Science & Engineering Statistics (NCSES) National Science Board (NSB) Home National Science Board (NSB) Updates Extraordinary Possibility Print this Page Extraordinary Possibility January 30, 2026 Credit: National Science Board National Science Board Members in Action As 2026 begins, the National Science Board (NSB) reflects on remarkable achievements during the past year of unprecedented change. As stewards of a long-term strategic vision for the U.S. science and technology (S&T) enterprise, the Board: Celebrated NSF as a keystone of U.S. progress and prosperity on its 75 th anniversary: Winning the race for the future with the National Science Foundation . Demonstrated quantitatively the economic and security impact of NSF investments in data briefs: Winning the Race for the Future and NSF Investments Are Key to U.S. Leadership in AI & Quantum . Transformed our Congressionally mandated Science and Engineering Indicators to better inform decision makers by focusing on three topics crucial to U.S. innovation, competitiveness, and national security: Discovery , Talent, and Translation to Impact. Published a comprehensive, three-year examination of NSF's Merit Review policy with six recommendations to strengthen NSF transparency and accountability and enhance the delivery of benefits to all Americans, while staying grounded in supporting the most meritorious research. Met with national security leaders across the federal S&T enterprise, increasing NSB engagement to better coordinate on how NSF could further contribute to the research and STEM talent development that is vital for achieving U.S. technological dominance to meet and exceed national security mission objectives, including in artificial intelligence, quantum computing, and advanced manufacturing. Provided timely information and responded to requests from policymakers; engaged with more than 75 decision-makers and stakeholders across multiple sectors on key S&T national priorities, including White House, Congressional, private sector, and academic leaders. Provided timely, strategic input to NSF's leadership on agency restructuring in response to Executive Order 14215: " Ensuring Accountability for All Agencies ." As NSF's statutory governing board, we commend NSF leadership and staff for their hard work, dedication, and resilience. They remain steadfast in their commitment to NSF's mission: advancing the progress of science in service of the American people. In 2025, NSF invested more than $8 billion across all fields of science and engineering, all states and territories, across sectors, and in education at each step of the STEM pathway. Last year demonstrated how NSF-funded research continues to deliver benefits across the nation while keeping U.S. scientific research and innovation on the cutting edge for both economic prosperity and national security. As we look towards 2026, NSF and NSB are not standing still. We are intentionally experimenting with new, targeted programs, policies, and processes while maintaining the critical science and engineering capacity and world-leading infrastructure that is vital to our economy and national security. For our part, NSB is committed to working with the White House, Congress, and NSF leadership to realize a next generation NSF that will deliver benefits, move faster, partner better, and fully realize the agency's unique value. In 2026, NSB plans to accelerate the transformation to a Next Generation NSF : Identify fundamental research and education needs relevant to national security and economic prosperity and develop a portfolio of NSF activities to address these priorities. Engage across federal agencies to strategically partner (e.g. with the Department of Energy's Genesis Mission , and the Department of War's Critical Technology Areas ), deploying NSF-funded basic research to solve problems and speed translation to application. Advance multisectoral initiatives to develop America's STEM talent , from the skilled technical workforce to PhDs – one of the nation's most strategic investments. Pursue creation of a non-profit foundation to make it easier for non-federal entities, including industry and philanthropy, to partner with NSF and make federal dollars go further. Capitalize on Merit Review reforms to build a strategic, world-leading research portfolio that leverages the perspectives and expertise of people across all sectors. Strengthen our partnership with NSF leadership, working together to ensure agency operational readiness for the changed landscape of federal, national, and global S&T. Grow NSF's capacity to help realize a Golden Age of American Innovation and demonstrate a transformative approach that results in national and societal outcomes from S&T research. The future will not be shaped by science alone, but it cannot be shaped without it. At this pivotal moment, the United States must act with urgency, invest with purpose, and collaborate across boundaries. No one sector, agency, or organization can do this alone. Now is the time for us all to work together to transform our S&T enterprise to meet the 21 st century world. The National Science Board extends its deep appreciation to the researchers, students, educators, innovators, policymakers, and public servants whose work sustains our nation's scientific enterprise. Their dedication reminds us that a future of extraordinary possibility is not guaranteed; it is built through the decisions we make, the partnerships we forge, and the curiosity and courage we choose to nurture. Together, we can bring about the next era of scientific discovery, opportunity, and U.S. leadership. Learn more about the National Science Board. Media Contact: Nadine Lymn, National Science Board, (703) 292-2490, nlymn@nsf.gov Top Publication date: January 30, 2026 Last updated: January 30, 2026 Randolph Building 401 Dulany Street Alexandria, VA 22314 (703) 292-5111 Sign up for email updates Footer About Us About NSF Careers Our Directorates & Offices National Science Board Contact Us What's New News & Announcements Events Science Matters Blog Information For Funding Seekers NSF Awardees Congress Media Educators Panelists Resources Documents & Reports Budget, Performance & Financial Reporting Public Access Stopping Harassment Research Security Scientific Integrity Research.gov Required Policy Links Vulnerability disclosure Inspector General Privacy FOIA No FEAR Act USA.gov Accessibility Plain language 