 Scientists Release Biggest 2D Map of the Universe | Newswise ☰ News Latest News Currently Embargoed Research News Releases Research Alert News With Video/Audio RSS Browse More Sections Medicine Science Life Business Expert Pitches Channels Medicine Science Life Business Journal News Trends and Top Stories By Location Meeting, Grants & Events Biotech Cancer COVID Clinical Trials Diabetes Genetics Infectious Disease Neuro Obesity Women's Health View all Medicine Channels Chemistry Climate Science Dinosaurs DOE Science News Engineering Materials Science Physics Space View all Science Channels Behavioral Science Education Government History Politics Social Media View all Life Channels Economics Wall Street In the Workplace Women in Business View all Business Channels Cell (journal) JAMA Journal of Experimental Medicine Nature (journal) NEJM Neurology (journal) PLoS View all Journal Channels Editor's Picks Popular with Readers Stories Getting News Coverage View all Trends and Top Stories Afghanistan News African News China News Cuba News Europe News Germany News Gulf of Mexico India/Pakistan News Iraq News View all by Location Channels Grant Funded News Medical Meetings Newswise Live - Event in Progress Newswise Live - Expert Spotlight Newswise Live - Events Scientific Meetings View all Meeting, Grants & Events Channels Sign up for the wires and see archived wires Sign Up Now Experts Expert Pitch Browse experts available to comment on breaking news Expert Query Request an expert contact, get responses directly to your inbox Expert Directory Find an expert by topic in a comprehensive database Journalists Pricing About About Curious by Nature Podcast Member Services Pricing Accessibility Statement Newswise Live Invoice Lookup Archived Wires Media Subscribers Services for Journalists Sample Effectiveness Reports Terms of Service Privacy Policy Our Staff Contact Us Blog FAQ Help ⌕ Request a Demo Login Register Scientists Release Biggest 2D Map of the Universe The new DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys map serves as the foundation for the largest-ever 3D map of the Universe, used to investigate dark energy 10-Aug-2026 at 6:40 PM EDT , by NSF's NOIRLab ♡ Credit: DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys/LBNL/DOE & KPNO/CTIO/NOIRLab/NSF/AURA Image processing: M. Rodriguez (Gemini Observatory/NSF NOIRLab), J. Miller (Gemini Observatory/NSF NOIRLab), T.A. Rector (University of Alaska Anchorage/NSF NOIRLab) & M. Zamani (NSF NOIRL Among the nearly four billion objects in the DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys’ map is Messier 96 (NGC 3368), a majestic spiral galaxy nestled in the constellation Leo approximately 35 million light-years from Earth. Spanning 100,000 light-years, slightly larger than our own Milky Way in size, it’s the brightest member of the Messier 96 Group, the closest grouping of galaxies to our own Local Group. The Messier 96 data were extracted from the DESI Legacy Survey and captured by the U.S. Department of Energy-fabricated Dark Energy Camera (DECam), a powerful CCD camera affixed to the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) Victor M. Blanco 4-meter Telescope at NSF Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO), a Program of NSF NOIRLab. The asymmetrical appearance of Messier 96 hints at its history of gravitational interactions: dark dust trails are distributed unevenly throughout the spiral arms, which appear smeared in certain areas. Though it’s not obvious in this image, scientists agree that the bright core is not exactly at the center of the galaxy where they would expect it to be. These distorted spiral patterns and the misplaced central core point to disruption caused by the gravitational pull exerted by other galaxies in the Messier 96 Group that have drifted farther away from this preeminent group member. Credit: DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys/LBNL/DOE & KPNO/Dark Energy Survey/FNAL/DECam/CTIO/NOIRLab/NSF/AURA/DSS2/E. Slawik Image Processing: M. Rodriguez (Gemini Observatory/NSF NOIRLab), J. Miller (Gemini Observatory/NSF NOIRLab), T.A. Rector (University of Alaska Among the nearly four billion objects in the DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys’ map is Messier 96 (NGC 3368), a majestic spiral galaxy nestled in the constellation Leo approximately 35 million light-years from Earth. Spanning 100,000 light-years, slightly larger than our own Milky Way in size, it’s the brightest member of the Messier 96 Group, the closest grouping of galaxies to our own Local Group. The Messier 96 data were extracted from the DESI Legacy Survey and captured by the U.S. Department of Energy-fabricated Dark Energy Camera (DECam), a powerful CCD camera affixed to the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) Victor M. Blanco 4-meter Telescope at NSF Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO), a Program of NSF NOIRLab. The asymmetrical appearance of Messier 96 hints at its history of gravitational interactions: dark dust trails are distributed unevenly throughout the spiral arms, which appear smeared in certain areas. Though it’s not obvious in this image, scientists agree that the bright core is not exactly at the center of the galaxy where they would expect it to be. These distorted spiral patterns and the misplaced central core point to disruption caused by the gravitational pull exerted by other galaxies in the Messier 96 Group that have drifted farther away from this preeminent group member. Credit: DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys/LBNL/DOE & KPNO/CTIO/NOIRLab/NSF/AURA Image processing: M. Rodriguez (Gemini Observatory/NSF NOIRLab), J. Miller (Gemini Observatory/NSF NOIRLab), T.A. Rector (University of Alaska Anchorage/NSF NOIRLab) & M. Zamani (NSF NOI Among the nearly four billion objects in the DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys’ map is Messier 96 (NGC 3368), a majestic spiral galaxy nestled in the constellation Leo approximately 35 million light-years from Earth. Spanning 100,000 light-years, slightly larger than our own Milky Way in size, it’s the brightest member of the Messier 96 Group, the closest grouping of galaxies to our own Local Group. The Messier 96 data were extracted from the DESI Legacy Survey and captured by the U.S. Department of Energy-fabricated Dark Energy Camera (DECam), a powerful CCD camera affixed to the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) Victor M. Blanco 4-meter Telescope at NSF Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO), a Program of NSF NOIRLab. The asymmetrical appearance of Messier 96 hints at its history of gravitational interactions: dark dust trails are distributed unevenly throughout the spiral arms, which appear smeared in certain areas. Though it’s not obvious in this image, scientists agree that the bright core is not exactly at the center of the galaxy where they would expect it to be. These distorted spiral patterns and the misplaced central core point to disruption caused by the gravitational pull exerted by other galaxies in the Messier 96 Group that have drifted farther away from this preeminent group member. Credit: KPNO/NOIRLab/NSF/AURA/P. Horálek (Institute of Physics in Opava) The band of the Milky Way stretches across the sky above U.S. National Science Foundation Kitt Peak National Observatory (KPNO), a Program of NSF NOIRLab. The largest telescope in this image is the NSF Nicholas U. Mayall 4-meter Telescope, which houses the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI). City lights from Tucson, Arizona are visible in the distance. Credit: CTIO/NOIRLab/NSF/AURA/T. Matsopoulos Beautiful sunsets often grace the telescopes of Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO), a Program of NSF NOIRLab. Pictured in this aerial image are the Víctor M. Blanco 4-meter Telescope (foreground), the SMARTS 1.5-meter, 0.9-meter, and 1.0-meter Telescopes, the Curtis Schmidt Telescope, and many more of the 40+ NOIRLab-operated telescopes in the foothills of the Chilean Andes. At 2200 meters (7200 feet) above sea level and in its relatively isolated position, Cerro Tololo is the perfect place to observe the southern skies. In fact, the summit takes its name from the way it drops away steeply on the northern side, as described by the local Indigenous Diaguita people. After 60 years of fruitful discoveries, CTIO continues to push the boundaries of astronomy with bountiful observations of the abyss up above. Previous Next Sort Images/Video Newswise — Hold on to your telescopes: the DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys team has released the largest-ever 2D map of the Universe. The 5.6-trillion-pixel map contains nearly four billion celestial objects, including stars, galaxies, black holes, and asteroids. The data are available for all to use and are publicly viewable through the Legacy Survey Sky Viewer . Astronomers and citizen scientists can combine the map with their own observations to better understand our Universe. Researchers can search for rare phenomena like gravitational lenses, observe fleeting events like supernovae, and investigate two of physics’ biggest mysteries: dark matter, the invisible substance that accounts for most of the mass in our Universe, and dark energy, the force driving our Universe’s accelerating expansion. The new map builds on earlier versions from the DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys that have already proved invaluable. To date, more than 1800 science papers have been published referencing the Legacy Surveys’ data. “It’s part of the fabric of astronomy research now,” says David Schlegel, a co-lead of the Legacy Surveys and scientist at the Department of Energy’s Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (Berkeley Lab). “When you're working with astronomical objects today, you often start by pulling up the Legacy Imaging Viewer to see what you’re looking at.” Covering roughly 75% of the sky in visible and near-infrared light, the updated map provides a deep view of the extragalactic Universe not blocked by the dust and stars of our own Milky Way. Researchers expect it will remain the most comprehensive 2D map of our Universe for years to come. More than 160 scientists contributed to data collection for the project, and a team of 20 produced the final dataset released today. It was built by combining 263,407 telescope exposures from three ground-based sky surveys: The Dark Energy Camera Legacy Survey (DECaLS), conducted by the 570-megapixel Department of Energy-fabricated Dark Energy Camera ( DECam ), mounted on the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) Victor M. Blanco 4-meter Telescope at NSF Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory ( CTIO ), a Program of NSF NOIRLab. The Mayall z-band Legacy Survey (MzLS), conducted by the NSF Nicholas U. Mayall 4-meter Telescope at NSF Kitt Peak National Observatory ( KPNO ), a Program of NSF NOIRLab. The Beijing-Arizona Sky Survey (BASS) at the University of Arizona’s Steward Observatory, conducted with the UA Bok 2.3-meter Telescope at KPNO and supplemented by years of data from NASA’s Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) satellite mission. In addition to the extended file collection , the DESI Legacy Surveys’ full catalog of data is made available as a searchable database via the Astro Data Lab at the Community Science and Data Center ( CSDC ), a Program of NSF NOIRLab. These services are accessible to the entire astronomy community to facilitate data access and analysis. “Explorations of our Universe always start with images of the night sky. The DESI Imaging Legacy Surveys are just one step in this venerable human tradition,” says Arjun Dey, co-lead of the Legacy Surveys and an astronomer at NSF NOIRLab. “For our team, these data are fundamental to the investigation of the expansion history of the Universe and the formation of our galaxy. But the skies belong to everyone, and this survey gives everyone the chance to marvel at their wonders.” The DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys were originally conducted to prepare for the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument ( DESI ) survey. The Legacy Surveys’ 2D map is essentially a deep photograph of the sky; it records where galaxies and stars appear and how bright they appear. This crucial step enables DESI to select objects and measure their light in different wavelengths to determine their distances, building the largest high-resolution 3D map ever made . Scientists use this map to study the way galaxies have clustered at different ages of the Universe to track dark energy over time. In April 2026, DESI completed its original five-year survey ahead of schedule and with vastly more objects than expected. The early results have shown surprising hints that dark energy’s impact may be weakening over time — a paradigm shift that could potentially shape the predicted fate of our Universe. DESI expects to publish improved results using its first five years of data in 2027 and is continuing observations into 2028. Beyond supporting DESI, the Legacy Surveys will be a foundational reference for the next generation of telescopes. As new observatories like NSF–DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory , jointly funded by the NSF and DOE’s Office of Science ( DOE/SC ), and NASA’s Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope come online, researchers can compare their observations with one of the deepest and most comprehensive views of the sky ever assembled. The Legacy Surveys’ data will also help scientists train artificial intelligence tools to analyze petabytes of astronomical data and accelerate new discoveries. It will be among the datasets used in an astrophysics pilot project within the American Science Cloud, part of the DOE’s Genesis Mission . More information The DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys are supported by the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of High Energy Physics; the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science user facility; the U.S. National Science Foundation, Division of Astronomical Sciences; and the partner institutions. DESI is supported by the DOE Office of Science and by the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science national user facility. Additional support for DESI is provided by the U.S. National Science Foundation; the Science and Technology Facilities Council of the United Kingdom; the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation; the Heising-Simons Foundation; the French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA); the Secretariat of Science, Humanities, Technology and Innovation (SECIHTI) of Mexico; the Ministry of Science and Innovation of Spain; and by the DESI member institutions. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (Berkeley Lab) is committed to groundbreaking research focused on discovery science and solutions for abundant and reliable energy supplies. The lab’s expertise spans materials, chemistry, physics, biology, earth and environmental science, mathematics, and computing. Researchers from around the world rely on the lab’s world-class scientific facilities for their own pioneering research. Founded in 1931 on the belief that the biggest problems are best addressed by teams, Berkeley Lab and its scientists have been recognized with 17 Nobel Prizes. Berkeley Lab is a multiprogram national laboratory managed by the University of California for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science. DOE’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States, and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, please visit energy.gov/science . NSF NOIRLab , the U.S. National Science Foundation center for ground-based optical-infrared astronomy, operates the International Gemini Observatory (a facility of NSF , NRC–Canada , ANID–Chile , MCTIC–Brazil , MINCyT–Argentina , and KASI–Republic of Korea ), NSF Kitt Peak National Observatory ( KPNO ), NSF Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory ( CTIO ), the Community Science and Data Center ( CSDC ), and NSF–DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory (in cooperation with DOE ’s SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory). It is managed by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy ( AURA ) under a cooperative agreement with NSF and is headquartered in Tucson, Arizona. The scientific community is honored to have the opportunity to conduct astronomical research on I’oligam Du’ag (Kitt Peak) in Arizona, on Maunakea in Hawai‘i, and on Cerro Tololo and Cerro Pachón in Chile. We recognize and acknowledge the very significant cultural role and reverence of I’oligam Du’ag to the Tohono O’odham Nation, and Maunakea to the Kanaka Maoli (Native Hawaiians) community. Links Berkeley Lab’s press release Legacy Survey Sky viewer Photos of the Víctor M. Blanco 4-meter Telescope Videos of the Víctor M. Blanco 4-meter Telescope Photos of DECam Images taken by DECam Images of Nicholas U. Mayall 4-meter telescope Videos of Nicholas U. Mayall 4-meter telescope Check out other NOIRLab Organization Releases Contacts Arjun Dey Astronomer NSF NOIRLab Email: [email protected] Josie Fenske Public Information Officer NSF NOIRLab Email: [email protected] Lauren Biron Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Science Communication and Media Relations Specialist Email: [email protected] Request an Expert MEDIA CONTACT Register for reporter access to contact details Article Multimedia All Images Videos Credit: DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys/LBNL/DOE & KPNO/CTIO/NOIRLab/NSF/AURA Image processing: M. Rodriguez (Gemini Observatory/NSF NOIRLab), J. Miller (Gemini Observatory/NSF NOIRLab), T.A. Rector (University of Alaska Anchorage/NSF NOIRLab) & M. Zamani (NSF NOI Caption: Among the nearly four billion objects in the DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys’ map is Messier 96 (NGC 3368), a majestic spiral galaxy nestled in the constellation Leo approximately 35 million light-years from Earth. Spanning 100,000 light-years, slightly larger than our own Milky Way in size, it’s the brightest member of the Messier 96 Group, the closest grouping of galaxies to our own Local Group. The Messier 96 data were extracted from the DESI Legacy Survey and captured by the U.S. Department of Energy-fabricated Dark Energy Camera (DECam), a powerful CCD camera affixed to the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) Victor M. Blanco 4-meter Telescope at NSF Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO), a Program of NSF NOIRLab. The asymmetrical appearance of Messier 96 hints at its history of gravitational interactions: dark dust trails are distributed unevenly throughout the spiral arms, which appear smeared in certain areas. Though it’s not obvious in this image, scientists agree that the bright core is not exactly at the center of the galaxy where they would expect it to be. These distorted spiral patterns and the misplaced central core point to disruption caused by the gravitational pull exerted by other galaxies in the Messier 96 Group that have drifted farther away from this preeminent group member. Credit: KPNO/NOIRLab/NSF/AURA/P. Horálek (Institute of Physics in Opava) Caption: The band of the Milky Way stretches across the sky above U.S. National Science Foundation Kitt Peak National Observatory (KPNO), a Program of NSF NOIRLab. The largest telescope in this image is the NSF Nicholas U. Mayall 4-meter Telescope, which houses the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI). City lights from Tucson, Arizona are visible in the distance. Credit: CTIO/NOIRLab/NSF/AURA/T. Matsopoulos Caption: Beautiful sunsets often grace the telescopes of Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO), a Program of NSF NOIRLab. Pictured in this aerial image are the Víctor M. Blanco 4-meter Telescope (foreground), the SMARTS 1.5-meter, 0.9-meter, and 1.0-meter Telescopes, the Curtis Schmidt Telescope, and many more of the 40+ NOIRLab-operated telescopes in the foothills of the Chilean Andes. At 2200 meters (7200 feet) above sea level and in its relatively isolated position, Cerro Tololo is the perfect place to observe the southern skies. In fact, the summit takes its name from the way it drops away steeply on the northern side, as described by the local Indigenous Diaguita people. After 60 years of fruitful discoveries, CTIO continues to push the boundaries of astronomy with bountiful observations of the abyss up above. Credit: DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys/LBNL/DOE & KPNO/CTIO/NOIRLab/NSF/AURA Image processing: M. Rodriguez (Gemini Observatory/NSF NOIRLab), J. Miller (Gemini Observatory/NSF NOIRLab), T.A. Rector (University of Alaska Anchorage/NSF NOIRLab) & M. Zamani (NSF NOIRL Caption: Among the nearly four billion objects in the DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys’ map is Messier 96 (NGC 3368), a majestic spiral galaxy nestled in the constellation Leo approximately 35 million light-years from Earth. Spanning 100,000 light-years, slightly larger than our own Milky Way in size, it’s the brightest member of the Messier 96 Group, the closest grouping of galaxies to our own Local Group. The Messier 96 data were extracted from the DESI Legacy Survey and captured by the U.S. Department of Energy-fabricated Dark Energy Camera (DECam), a powerful CCD camera affixed to the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) Victor M. Blanco 4-meter Telescope at NSF Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO), a Program of NSF NOIRLab. The asymmetrical appearance of Messier 96 hints at its history of gravitational interactions: dark dust trails are distributed unevenly throughout the spiral arms, which appear smeared in certain areas. Though it’s not obvious in this image, scientists agree that the bright core is not exactly at the center of the galaxy where they would expect it to be. These distorted spiral patterns and the misplaced central core point to disruption caused by the gravitational pull exerted by other galaxies in the Messier 96 Group that have drifted farther away from this preeminent group member. Credit: DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys/LBNL/DOE & KPNO/Dark Energy Survey/FNAL/DECam/CTIO/NOIRLab/NSF/AURA/DSS2/E. Slawik Image Processing: M. Rodriguez (Gemini Observatory/NSF NOIRLab), J. Miller (Gemini Observatory/NSF NOIRLab), T.A. Rector (University of Alaska Caption: Among the nearly four billion objects in the DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys’ map is Messier 96 (NGC 3368), a majestic spiral galaxy nestled in the constellation Leo approximately 35 million light-years from Earth. Spanning 100,000 light-years, slightly larger than our own Milky Way in size, it’s the brightest member of the Messier 96 Group, the closest grouping of galaxies to our own Local Group. The Messier 96 data were extracted from the DESI Legacy Survey and captured by the U.S. Department of Energy-fabricated Dark Energy Camera (DECam), a powerful CCD camera affixed to the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) Victor M. Blanco 4-meter Telescope at NSF Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO), a Program of NSF NOIRLab. The asymmetrical appearance of Messier 96 hints at its history of gravitational interactions: dark dust trails are distributed unevenly throughout the spiral arms, which appear smeared in certain areas. Though it’s not obvious in this image, scientists agree that the bright core is not exactly at the center of the galaxy where they would expect it to be. These distorted spiral patterns and the misplaced central core point to disruption caused by the gravitational pull exerted by other galaxies in the Messier 96 Group that have drifted farther away from this preeminent group member. TYPE OF ARTICLE Feature SECTION SCIENCE CHANNELS Environmental Science Physics Space and Astronomy KEYWORDS cosmolgy Astronomy Dark Energy Dark Energy Spectroscopic Experiment (DESI) Kitt Peak National Observatory Nicholas U. Mayall 4-meter Telescope National Science Foundation (NSF) Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science Dark Energy Camera Víctor M. Blanco 4-meter Telescope Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory COMMENTS | COMMENTING POLICY × Connecting Research and Experts with Journalists Unlock Your Access to Newswise Research News including Embargoed News and Expert Pitches 9 AM Daily Wire (click to select custom wire) 0:00 Eastern Standard Time 1:00 Eastern Standard Time 2:00 Eastern Standard Time 3:00 Eastern Standard Time 4:00 Eastern Standard Time 5:00 Eastern Standard Time 6:00 Eastern Standard Time 7:00 Eastern Standard Time 8:00 Eastern Standard Time 9:00 Eastern Standard Time 10:00 Eastern Standard Time 11:00 Eastern Standard Time 12:00 Eastern Standard Time 13:00 Eastern Standard Time 14:00 Eastern Standard Time 15:00 Eastern Standard Time 16:00 Eastern Standard Time 17:00 Eastern Standard Time 18:00 Eastern Standard Time 19:00 Eastern Standard Time 20:00 Eastern Standard Time 21:00 Eastern Standard Time 22:00 Eastern Standard Time 23:00 Eastern Standard Time Name: Email: Media Outlet: Continue Reading Used only to deliver research news. Unsubscribe anytime. View All Latest News Forms Media Press Pass User Registration Find My Account Pay an Invoice Contact Us Experts Request an Expert Expert Directory Embargoed News Search Sources Newswise Services for Journalists Services for Communicators Get Email Alerts Daily Wires Latest News Channel Index Advanced Search Live Events Get a Demo Pricing FAQ About Newswise Journalists use Newswise as a source for research news, experts, ready-to-use content and story ideas. Media relations professionals can connect with reporters and share their organization's news with a wider audience. Public readers discover the latest research news in science, medicine, social sciences, environment, technology, factchecks and business news from the world's most credible universities and research organizations. More than 7,000 email wires go to journalists from more than 2,400 media outlets around the globe. Contact Us Signup Subscribe to Newswise For Journalists Receive a Demo Privacy Notice Terms of Service 2026 Newswise , Inc ⌕ Login News Latest News Research News Releases Research Alert News with Video/Audio Browse More Sections Medicine Science Life Business Expert Pitches Channels Medicine Biotech Cancer COVID Clinical Trials Diabetes Genetics Infectious Disease Neuro Obesity Women?s Health View all Medicine Channels Science Chemistry Climate Science Dinosaurs DOE Science News Engineering Materials Science Physics Space View all Science Channels Life Behavioral Science Education Government History Politics Social Media View all Life Channels Business Economics Wall Street In the Workplace Women in Business View all Business Channels Journal News Cell (journal) JAMA Journal of Experimental Medicine Nature (journal) NEJM Neurology (journal) PLoS View all Journal Channels Trends and Top Stories Staff Picks Top Clipped Stories Top Hit Stories By Location Afghanistan News African News China News Cuba News Europe News Germany News Gulf of Mexico India/Pakistan News Iraq News View all by Location Channels Meetings, Grants, and Events Grant Funded News Medical Meetings Newswise Live - Event in Progress Newswise Live - Expert Spotlight Newswise Live - Events Scientific Meetings View all Meeting, Grants & Events Channels RSS Experts Expert Pitch Expert Query Expert Directory Journalists Pricing About Member Services Accessibility Statement Newswise Live Invoice Lookup Services for Journalists Archived Wires Participating Institutions Media Subscribers Sample Effectiveness Reports Terms of Service Privacy Policy Our Staff Contact Newswise Blog FAQ Help 0.56749 