 About D-Wave: The World’s Leading Quantum Computing Company Hardware Breakthrough Advances Quantum Error Correction Read Paper INVESTORS CAREERS STORE CONTACT Log In Products Products Discover how you can use quantum computing today Product Overview A dual-platform quantum approach Annealing Quantum Systems Quantum computers built for business and science Gate-Model Quantum Systems Supporting error awareness with dual-rail qubits Cloud Platform The Leap™ quantum cloud service provides real-time quantum access Software & Tools The Ocean™ suite of open-source tools are accessible via the Ocean SDK for rapid quantum development Professional Services The D-Wave Launch™ program on-boards your business to quantum computing Learning Solutions Start your journey! Explore D-Wave applications, events, and resources Solutions Solutions Discover how you can use quantum computing today By Use Case Quantum Optimization Summary Workforce Scheduling Production Scheduling Logistics Routing Resource Optimization Additional Use Cases By Role Developer Get started building real quantum applications Tech & Business Leaders Learn how quantum computing fits into your technology portfolio Quantum Research Explore the boundaries of quantum computing Sectors Sectors Discover how you can use quantum computing today Manufacturing & Logistics Public Sector Quantum Research Quantum AI Advanced Computing Learn Learn Start your journey! Explore D-Wave applications, events, and resources. What is Quantum Computing? Customer Success Stories Featured Applications D-Wave's Approach Publications Resource Library Events & Webinars "Quantum Matters" Podcast Training Blog Build Build Unlock your quantum skills and start building quantum applications today Community Forums Connect with and learn from other quantum developers. Getting Started Step-by-step approach to building quantum applications today. Code Samples Search for and run working examples by industry, problem type, and tools or techniques. Developer Start here! Documentation Find out more about D-Wave’s quantum technologies and how they work. Company Company We are the practical quantum computing company. Learn more about who we are and what we do. About D-Wave Newsroom Leadership Careers Media Resources Contact Get Started QUANTUM REALIZED About D-Wave D-Wave is a leader in the development and delivery of quantum computing systems, software, and services. It is the world’s first commercial supplier of quantum computers, and the first and only to offer dual-platform quantum computing products and services, spanning both annealing and gate-model quantum computing technologies. D-Wave’s mission is to help customers realize the value of quantum today through enterprise-grade systems available on-premises and via its Leap™ quantum cloud service, which offers 99.9% availability and uptime. More than 100 organizations across commercial, government and research sectors trust D-Wave to address complex computational challenges using quantum computing. OUR MISSION Deliver Powerful, Commercial, and Trusted Quantum Computing Solutions to Solve Real-World Problems From its inception, D-Wave has been committed to delivering products and services that rapidly transform industries by providing tangible, real-world value with quantum computers. From manufacturing and logistics to financial services, life sciences, and many other industries, find out how D-Wave can propel your business forward by realizing the power of quantum computing today. Watch Video CUSTOMERS Our Singular Focus Is Helping Customers Realize the Value of Quantum Our broad portfolio of customers—including Pattison Food Group, Ford Otosan, BASF, Shionogi, and Jülich Supercomputing Centre—have built hundreds of quantum applications in diverse areas such as workforce scheduling, logistics routing, manufacturing processes, drug discovery, materials simulation, research, portfolio optimization, and much more. See Application Examples 25+ Years Founded in 1999, D-Wave is the leader in the development and delivery of quantum computing systems, software, and services and is the world’s first commercial supplier of quantum computers. 375+ Employees Our employees are experts in their fields across processor development, chip fabrication, physics, cloud infrastructure, and more. Approximately 20% of our employees have PhDs in their respective fields. 250+ U.S. Patents Granted D-Wave's innovation and commitment to advancing the science of quantum computing has resulted in over 250 U.S. patents granted and over 100 peer-reviewed papers published in leading scientific journals. Extraordinary Technology Delivered Simply While quantum computers are incredibly complex systems, using one doesn’t have to be. D-Wave has put the power of the Advantage2™ quantum computer behind the easily accessible Leap quantum cloud service, and has developed hybrid solvers that combine the best of classical and quantum resources into easy-to-use tools. D-Wave is also a lot more than extraordinary technology. Our professional services team and technical experts are here to partner with you on your quantum journey. Using a phased approach, we’ll help you on-board to quantum with our D-Wave Launch program. D-Wave Launch Program "I think the most exciting part of this project is that millions of people in Japan watch TV commercials optimized by the D-Wave quantum machine." Recruit Group LEADERSHIP Experienced Leadership with a Track Record of Operational Excellence Our company has a shared passion and a simple mission: to unlock the power of quantum computing to help solve the world's most challenging problems. To do so, we've brought together a leadership team with unparalleled experience in business, science, and technology. The team comprises seasoned technology leaders and distinguished domain experts with decades of experience in their respective fields. Meet the Team Latest News Press Release D-Wave Selects Boca Raton for New Corporate Headquarters and U.S. R&D Facility Press Release BASF and D-Wave Announce Completion of Proof-of-Concept Project, Demonstrating Benchmark in Manufacturing Efficiency Press Release Florida Atlantic University Signs $20M Agreement to Purchase Advantage2 Quantum Computer Press Release D-Wave Demonstrates First Scalable, On-Chip Cryogenic Control of Gate-Model Qubits See All News We’d Love to Chat About How We Can Help Your Business You know your business. We know quantum computing. Let’s work together to find compelling solutions to your most complex business challenges. Connect with D-Wave Company Headquarters United States Boca Raton, Florida COMING SOON Palo Alto, California Tel: +1 650-285-2881 Research and Development United States Boca Raton, Florida COMING SOON New Haven, Connecticut Tel: +1 203-872-4723 Canada Tel: +1 604-630-1428 Fax: +1 604-638-1340 Asia Pacific Sales Japan sales@dwavesys.com www.dwavejapan.com EMEA Sales United Kingdom sales@dwavesys.com Join Our Email Marketing List Follow Us Products Product Overview Cloud Platform Systems Professional Services Software & Tools Learning Solutions Solutions Quantum Optimization Summary Workforce Scheduling Production Scheduling Vehicle Routing Resource Optimization Cargo Loading Sectors Manufacturing & Logistics Public Sector Quantum Research Quantum AI Learn Quantum Computing D-Wave's Approach Customer Success Stories Featured Applications Resource Library Publications Events & Webinars Training Build Getting Started Developer Documentation Community Forums Code Samples Company About D-Wave Leadership Careers Events & Webinars Newsroom Media Resources Investor Relations Contact More D-Wave D-Wave Japan Copyright 2026 D-Wave Quantum Inc. Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Patent Notice × 