 Dataerai Partners with DOE to Boost AI R&D Investments Through Landmark Genesis Mission - Dataerai Home Platform Solution Team News & Updates Careers Contact Menu Home Close Menu navigate Platform 01 Solution 02 Team 03 News & Updates 04 Careers 05 Contact Back to News & Updates Company May 7, 2026 Dataerai Partners with DOE to Boost AI R&D Investments Through Landmark Genesis Mission Dataerai and U.S. Department of Energy announce collaboration agreement to support national scientific data infrastructure and accelerate discovery with AI Dataerai, a pioneer in automated data curation and federated architectures, today announced it has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). This strategic collaboration is designed to support the Genesis Mission, a national initiative to harness AI to double American R&D productivity and impact within a decade. In the global race for AI deployment, the primary bottleneck for scientific applications is the availability of high-fidelity, "AI-ready" data. Dataerai and the DOE will explore strategic collaborations to build secure, scalable, and automated platforms necessary to transform federal datasets into AI assets. By leveraging Dataerai's expertise in automated metadata extraction and federated management, the collaboration aims to ensure that scientific data is findable and reusable the moment it is generated. Areas of collaboration may include: Automated Data Curation: Developing platforms for real-time metadata extraction from scientific instruments to ensure data is AI-ready at the source. Digital Twins and Autonomous Labs: Providing the high-throughput data backbone for AI-driven laboratories and multi-modal datasets to accelerate breakthroughs in areas such as fusion energy, biotechnology, and nuclear reactor design. Data Impact and Productivity Metrics: Developing automated tracking systems and metrics to measure the use and impact of scientific datasets, enabling researchers to evaluate the ROI of their data assets and maximize the return on investment for federally-funded research. "The Genesis Mission represents our generation's 'Apollo moment' for artificial intelligence," said Tim Kuehlhorn, CEO of Dataerai. "At Dataerai, we believe that the next era of discovery will be defined by how quickly we can curate and harmonize the world's most complex scientific data. This partnership provides the structure to turn that vision into a reality, ensuring that American scientists have the tools to iterate faster and move from result to insight with unprecedented speed." The agreement aligns with the DOE's broader strategy to unify federal computing assets and scientific datasets into a coordinated discovery engine. By participating in the Genesis Mission, Dataerai is joining a historic effort to leverage AI to drive breakthroughs across basic science, energy, and national security. contact Let us solve your data challenges. We help organizations capture, structure, and connect their data assets to enable collaboration, scalable research workflows, and AI-driven discovery. Get in touch if you’re interested in working with us. [06] Name Phone Number Email Address Subject Message --> Submit Building Collective Intelligence — the infrastructure for research data to power autonomous discovery. // data-array explore Platform Solution Team company News & Updates Careers Contact get in touch Request access © 2026 Dataerai, LLC. All rights reserved. 