 AI-Powered National Lab collaboration launches to secure U.S. critical minerals supply | Ames Laboratory Skip to main content Our Science Research Divisions Chemical & Biological Sciences Materials Sciences & Engineering Simulation, Modeling & Decision Science Critical Materials Research Programs CATS Center for the Advancement of Topological Semimetals CMI Critical Materials Innovation Hub iCOUP Institute for Cooperative Upcycling of Plastics ML-Accelerated Materials Discovery Center Machine Learning Accelerated Materials Discovery Center Staff Directory Research Highlights Services & Resources Contact Us Work With Us Work With Us Partnerships and Technology Transfer Through multi-institutional collaborations, industry partnerships, and technology licensing, we transition basic energy science from early-stage research to commercialization. Materials Preparation Center Purification, preparation, and characterization of metals, alloys, and single crystals for research and industry. Sensitive Instrument Facility Houses state-of-the-art electron microscopes in a vibration- and static-free environment for the highest possible resolution. Procurement Careers & Internships Contact Us News News Ames Lab News News Releases Feature Stories Ames Lab in the News Media Contacts Research Highlights Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Facebook About Us About Us About Ames Laboratory Mission & Values Leadership Our Organization History Visit Ames Laboratory Education Programs Careers & Internships Staff Directory Contact Us Toggle search form visibility Search Toggle navigation Search Our Science Chemical & Biological Sciences Material Sciences & Engineering Simulation, Modeling & Decision Science Critical Materials Center for the Advancement of Topological Semimetals (CATS) Critical Materials Innovation Hub Institute for Cooperative Upcycling of Plastics (iCOUP) Machine Learning Accelerated Materials Discovery Center About Us About Ames Laboratory Mission & Values Leadership Our Organization History Visit Ames Lab Work With Us Partnerships & Technology Transfer Materials Preparation Center Sensitive Instrument Facility News News News Releases Feature Stories In the News Media Contacts Education Programs Careers & Internships Staff Directory Contact Us News Menu News News Releases Ames Laboratory In the News Feature Stories Media Contacts Science Glossary December 12, 2025 AI-Powered National Lab collaboration launches to secure U.S. critical minerals supply Ames, Iowa A powerful new initiative—Critical Minerals and Materials to Unlock Supply (CM 2 US)—is harnessing artificial intelligence to transform how the U.S. discovers, develops, and delivers the critical minerals essential to modern technologies. Led by twelve U.S. Department of Energy national laboratories—including Ames National Laboratory and its Critical Materials Innovation (CMI) Hub, Argonne, Idaho Los Alamos, Lawrence Berkeley, Lawrence Livermore, National Energy Technology Laboratory, National Laboratory of the Rockies, Oak Ridge, Pacific Northwest, Sandia and SLAC—and supported by a coalition of innovative private-sector partners, CM 2 US uses AI to accelerate breakthroughs across the entire supply chain, from mining to manufacturing. At the heart of the CM 2 US initiative is an AI-driven engine that serves as a strategic guide for the entire critical minerals and materials supply chain. This system generates a dynamic digital map of the process—from mining to market—pinpointing the most promising opportunities and anticipating potential challenges before they emerge. By integrating advanced data platforms and machine learning with deep scientific expertise, the initiative enables smarter, faster decision-making and helps validate promising technologies early in development. Ihor Hlova, Ames Lab and CMI Hub scientist and co-lead for the project, said the initiative provides new opportunities for discovery and process optimization. “When training AI, the quality of our data is the quality of our models. With automation led by Ames Lab scientist Long Qi, within CM 2 US we can collect that data at unprecedented speed and consistency, running hundreds of experiments in days instead of years and enabling truly predictive, AI-guided discovery and process optimization,” said Hlova. CM²US exemplifies how national labs and industry can work together to solve challenges of national importance—strengthening America’s industrial base, securing supply chains, and ensuring global leadership in AI and energy relevant technologies. Ames National Laboratory and the Critical Materials Innovation (CMI) Hub have long been at the forefront of securing the nation’s access to critical materials. As the DOE’s flagship center for research on rare earths and other essential elements, Ames Lab and the CMI Hub lead efforts to reduce supply chain vulnerabilities through innovation in recovery, substitution, and efficient processing of critical minerals. This leadership directly supports the Department of Energy’s mission to advance energy security and economic resilience by ensuring reliable access to the materials that power energy technologies, national defense systems, and high-tech manufacturing. “The CM 2 US collaboration is a logical extension and next leap forward of Ames National Laboratory’s historic expertise in rare earths and critical materials, and CMI’s successful history of industry collaboration and bringing new technologies to market,” said Tom Lograsso, Director of CMI Hub. “Accelerating the pathway from laboratory to market has always been part of CMI’s mission. AI is essential for accelerating discovery.” This project is part of the U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission , an initiative to revolutionize American science and innovation through artificial intelligence, advanced computing, and next-generation research platforms. Ames National Laboratory plays a key role in this effort by leveraging its expertise in materials discovery, computational modeling, and AI-driven research to accelerate breakthroughs in energy innovations and critical materials. Ames National Laboratory is a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science National Laboratory operated by Iowa State University. Ames Laboratory creates innovative materials, technologies, and energy solutions. We use our expertise, unique capabilities, and interdisciplinary collaborations to solve global problems. Ames Laboratory is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy. The Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, please visit https://energy.gov/science . Published In: Critical Materials Innovation Hub For Researchers Chemical & Biological Sciences Materials Sciences & Engineering Simulation, Modeling & Decision Science Critical Materials Services and Resources Research Highlights For Industry Work with Us Services and Resources Materials Preparation Center For the Public About Us Visit Ames Lab Education Programs News Careers Contact Us For Employees Privacy and Security DOE Contract DOE Vulnerability Disclosure Program LinkedIn Youtube Facebook Instagram Twitter --> Ames National Laboratory is operated for the U.S. Department of Energy by Iowa State University. 