 GIS Software for Mapping and Spatial Analytics | Esri GIS Software for Mapping and Spatial Analytics | Esri Explore Esri with the new AI assistant (beta). Ask questions and get answers faster. Try it ArcGIS Esri’s comprehensive geospatial platform ArcGIS is enterprise technology that integrates and connects data through the context of geography. Learn about ArcGIS Esri builds ArcGIS, the world’s leading GIS mapping software. ArcGIS overview Learn about Esri’s comprehensive geospatial platform What is GIS? Discover geographic information system (GIS) technology About Esri Get to know the innovative software company behind ArcGIS Previous Next Who uses Esri technology? Leading organizations in virtually every field use Esri technology to support daily operations and guide long-term strategies. Explore stories of organizations innovating with ArcGIS. Portcoast Ashley Furniture State of Utah DIGITAL TWIN The 3D model running Vietnam’s busiest port Portcoast, a leading consulting firm, is working with the Vietnamese government to deliver a complete digital overhaul of the country’s busiest port. Its engineers are building a GIS-powered 3D model that captures everything from the seabed to crane operations, updating in real time as a living digital twin. Watch the video RETAIL PLANNING World’s largest furniture maker reveals critical market insights with maps Ashley Furniture uses geospatial software to guide the expansion of its nearly 1,000-store network across North America. With a refined understanding of local markets, Ashley’s teams make smarter decisions about where to open new locations and how to optimize each store’s visibility and inventory. Read the full story STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT Utah uses GIS to turn geographic constraints into housing solutions The State of Utah is pioneering a data-driven approach to housing affordability by bringing together state planners, university researchers, and local governments to coordinate solutions across the mountainous state’s constrained geography. Read the full story Trending insights on the power of GIS technology ENERGY US Solar doubled the properties it evaluates without growing head count Read the story in Esri’s WhereNext magazine RETAIL How geospatial software transforms retail outcomes Play the episode on Esri’s podcast Government Oklahoma automates election data maintenance, improving accuracy Read the story in Esri’s ArcNews Previous Next New and newsworthy Product releases, upcoming events, partnerships, and more from Esri PRODUCT FEATURE Your infrastructure. Your rules. Your ArcGIS Enterprise. Explore ArcGIS Enterprise: self-hosted software for mapping, analytics, and data management INITIATIVE Explore Esri’s approach to sustainability Esri prioritizes sustainability in operations, products, and community event Join us at the Esri European Developer & Technology Summit Frankfurt, Germany | 20–22 October 2026 | Get exclusive tech demos and transformative ideas partnership Esri and Microsoft Esri provides leading spatial analytics capabilities in Microsoft Fabric FREE COURSE Learn how to combine imagery, GIS, and AI Register for Esri’s ArcGIS Imagery MOOC, opening in August 2026 Previous Next opens in new window 