 Ames Lab scientist provides AI-driven roadmap for future permanent magnet design | Ames Laboratory Skip to main content Our Science Research Divisions Chemical & Biological Sciences Materials Sciences & Engineering Simulation, Modeling & Decision Science Critical Materials Research Programs CATS Center for the Advancement of Topological Semimetals CMI Critical Materials Innovation Hub iCOUP Institute for Cooperative Upcycling of Plastics ML-Accelerated Materials Discovery Center Machine Learning Accelerated Materials Discovery Center Staff Directory Research Highlights Services & Resources Contact Us Work With Us Work With Us Partnerships and Technology Transfer Through multi-institutional collaborations, industry partnerships, and technology licensing, we transition basic energy science from early-stage research to commercialization. Materials Preparation Center Purification, preparation, and characterization of metals, alloys, and single crystals for research and industry. Sensitive Instrument Facility Houses state-of-the-art electron microscopes in a vibration- and static-free environment for the highest possible resolution. Procurement Careers & Internships Contact Us News News Ames Lab News News Releases Feature Stories Ames Lab in the News Media Contacts Research Highlights Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Facebook About Us About Us About Ames Laboratory Mission & Values Leadership Our Organization History Visit Ames Laboratory Education Programs Careers & Internships Staff Directory Contact Us Toggle search form visibility Search Toggle navigation Search Our Science Chemical & Biological Sciences Material Sciences & Engineering Simulation, Modeling & Decision Science Critical Materials Center for the Advancement of Topological Semimetals (CATS) Critical Materials Innovation Hub Institute for Cooperative Upcycling of Plastics (iCOUP) Machine Learning Accelerated Materials Discovery Center About Us About Ames Laboratory Mission & Values Leadership Our Organization History Visit Ames Lab Work With Us Partnerships & Technology Transfer Materials Preparation Center Sensitive Instrument Facility News News News Releases Feature Stories In the News Media Contacts Education Programs Careers & Internships Staff Directory Contact Us News Menu News News Releases Ames Laboratory In the News Feature Stories Media Contacts Science Glossary June 3, 2026 Ames Lab scientist provides AI-driven roadmap for future permanent magnet design Ames, Iowa Researchers at Ames National Laboratory are advancing the discovery of materials for rare-earth-free permanent magnets by combining fundamental physics with artificial intelligence. The work contributes to the U. S. Department of Energy’s (DOE) Genesis Mission , which unites DOE National Labs, industry, and academia to harness artificial intelligence (AI) for scientific breakthroughs in energy, discovery science, and national security, including a focus on securing America’s supply of rare earths and other critical minerals. Rare earth elements give today’s high-performance magnets their exceptional strength and resistance to de-magnetization, properties essential for many technologies and particularly for energy generation and defense. But they can be quite expensive and often require dependence on unstable sources outside the United States. Reducing or eliminating the need for rare earth elements will lower costs and enhance domestic production of high-performance magnets. For more than 20 years, researchers have been looking for permanent magnet materials that do not use rare earth elements. Investigations have largely been material-focused, with researchers relying on a trial-and-error approach that involves synthesizing materials in the lab, testing them, and then using the data to build knowledge one data point at a time. Physics-informed AI: An integrated pathway for accelerated discovery and design of next-generation permanent magnets. In a recently published article , Ames Lab Scientist Prashant Singh outlines a faster, more systematic path by combining physics-based modeling, high-throughput simulations, and reasoning-based AI tools to guide discovery before materials are made in the lab. This approach focuses on understanding how a material’s atomic structure and electronic behavior to determine key magnetic properties such as magnetization strength, energy storage capacity, resistance to demagnetization, and performance at elevated temperatures. By embedding that physics knowledge into computational models, researchers can more efficiently identify promising material candidates and reduce the need for costly experimental iteration. Ames Lab researchers are well-positioned as leaders in addressing this challenge. "Ames Lab's strength comes from its deep expertise and a long history of data in the magnet space that no other institution has," Singh said. "That's what makes our role critical. In any material design problem, you need to know how combining two elements will change their performance before you ever run an experiment. We have been building both theoretical and analytical tools to answer that question, and we are now bringing AI into that process to make it faster and broader in scope." Building on this foundation, the team is developing new AI-assisted ways for researchers to interact with these models more directly, allowing them to pose design questions, refine requirements, and explore potential materials more efficiently. These emerging capabilities draw on earlier work such as Singh’s recently developed tool DuctGPT , an agentic AI designed for interactive exploration and materials design. The challenge to making these approaches effective is ensuring AI models are trained in the right kind of data. Rather than relying on generalized data, models need to be trained on experimentally measured and scientifically calculated material properties to enable predictions that remain grounded in real-world behavior. “Understanding the physics of materials is important to include in AI frameworks when you are trying to design new materials. If you just use the data to train your models, you are going to get only the predictions within the range of information you have,” Singh said. “But once you understand the physics of what controls specific properties, then you and your agentic tools or AI frameworks can search arbitrary material space.” These AI tools offer an important addition benefit: they can take into consideration material availability and costs. "Supply chain conditions shift by the hour, material costs fluctuate, availability changes daily, and the market never stands still," Singh explained. "By factoring those conditions into the discovery process, we can better target materials that are not only high-performing but also practical to produce and scale.” This roadmap addresses the full critical materials pipeline from accelerating discovery to ensuring industrial viability could reduce America’s reliance on outside sources for critical materials and build a more resilient domestic supply chain. By combining Ames National Laboratory’s long-standing strengths in theory, simulation, and proprietary magnetic materials data with emerging AI capabilities, researchers hope to dramatically expand the pace and scope of magnetic materials innovation. "What sets Ames apart is seven decades of work in critical materials—a depth of knowledge no other lab can match," said Singh. "We have strong foundations in theory and simulation, and proprietary magnetic material data exclusive to Ames. Adding AI to that base lets us explore new materials and magnetic possibilities faster and directly address the supply chain vulnerabilities the country faces." Ames National Laboratory is a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science National Laboratory operated by Iowa State University. Ames Laboratory creates innovative materials, technologies, and energy solutions. We use our expertise, unique capabilities, and interdisciplinary collaborations to solve global problems. Ames Laboratory is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy. The Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, please visit https://energy.gov/science . Published In: Materials Sciences and Engineering For Researchers Chemical & Biological Sciences Materials Sciences & Engineering Simulation, Modeling & Decision Science Critical Materials Services and Resources Research Highlights For Industry Work with Us Services and Resources Materials Preparation Center For the Public About Us Visit Ames Lab Education Programs News Careers Contact Us For Employees Privacy and Security DOE Contract DOE Vulnerability Disclosure Program LinkedIn Youtube Facebook Instagram Twitter --> Ames National Laboratory is operated for the U.S. Department of Energy by Iowa State University. 