 Ames National Laboratory to contribute to AI-Driven magnet manufacturing project under DOE Genesis Mission | Ames Laboratory Skip to main content Our Science Research Divisions Chemical & Biological Sciences Materials Sciences & Engineering Simulation, Modeling & Decision Science Critical Materials Research Programs CATS Center for the Advancement of Topological Semimetals CMI Critical Materials Innovation Hub iCOUP Institute for Cooperative Upcycling of Plastics ML-Accelerated Materials Discovery Center Machine Learning Accelerated Materials Discovery Center Staff Directory Research Highlights Services & Resources Contact Us Work With Us Work With Us Partnerships and Technology Transfer Through multi-institutional collaborations, industry partnerships, and technology licensing, we transition basic energy science from early-stage research to commercialization. Materials Preparation Center Purification, preparation, and characterization of metals, alloys, and single crystals for research and industry. Sensitive Instrument Facility Houses state-of-the-art electron microscopes in a vibration- and static-free environment for the highest possible resolution. Procurement Careers & Internships Contact Us News News Ames Lab News News Releases Feature Stories Ames Lab in the News Media Contacts Research Highlights Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Facebook About Us About Us About Ames Laboratory Mission & Values Leadership Our Organization History Visit Ames Laboratory Education Programs Careers & Internships Staff Directory Contact Us Toggle search form visibility Search Toggle navigation Search Our Science Chemical & Biological Sciences Material Sciences & Engineering Simulation, Modeling & Decision Science Critical Materials Center for the Advancement of Topological Semimetals (CATS) Critical Materials Innovation Hub Institute for Cooperative Upcycling of Plastics (iCOUP) Machine Learning Accelerated Materials Discovery Center About Us About Ames Laboratory Mission & Values Leadership Our Organization History Visit Ames Lab Work With Us Partnerships & Technology Transfer Materials Preparation Center Sensitive Instrument Facility News News News Releases Feature Stories In the News Media Contacts Education Programs Careers & Internships Staff Directory Contact Us News Menu News News Releases Ames Laboratory In the News Feature Stories Media Contacts Science Glossary July 22, 2026 Ames National Laboratory to contribute to AI-Driven magnet manufacturing project under DOE Genesis Mission Ames Lab will help advance AI-guided manufacturing of high-performance magnets and strengthen domestic supply chains AMES, Iowa — Ames National Laboratory will contribute its expertise in critical materials and advanced manufacturing as a partner in a newly funded project led by Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) that aims to accelerate the development of high-performance permanent magnets without the use of heavy rare earth elements. The project, AI-Guided Manufacturing of High-Performance Heavy Rare-Earth-Free Magnets for Critical Materials Security (AIM-MAG), was selected for a Phase I award under the U.S. Department of Energy's Genesis Mission program. The project team will develop an artificial intelligence-enabled framework to improve the design and manufacturing of neodymium-iron-boron (Nd-Fe-B) permanent magnets, which are essential to national security technologies, resilient domestic supply chains, advanced manufacturing, and critical energy systems. The AIM-MAG project combines expertise in artificial intelligence, materials science, and advanced manufacturing to better understand how production methods affect magnet performance. Using AI tools alongside experimental data, the team aims to speed the development and improvement of high-performance magnets that do not require heavy rare earth elements, helping strengthen U.S. critical materials supply chains. A key innovation of the project is an AI-powered knowledge platform that combines information from scientific literature, existing databases, and experimental datasets. By connecting manufacturing conditions with material structure and magnetic performance, the platform will help researchers identify patterns that might otherwise be missed and guide the design of next-generation magnets. Ames Lab brings decades of expertise in rare earth materials, magnet development, and advanced manufacturing to the AIM-MAG partnership. Through its Advanced Magnet Facility (AMF) and other magnet-related capabilities, the Laboratory will be contributing its expertise and experience in novel magnet manufacture and alloy characterization to provide a strong foundation for advancing new approaches to magnet design and production. "Ames National Laboratory is pleased to partner on this effort to advance AI-enabled approaches for critical materials research and manufacturing," said Ames Lab Director Karl Mueller. "Projects like AIM-MAG will accelerate scientific discovery while helping address important challenges in domestic magnet production and materials security. Strengthening domestic magnet manufacturing is an important step toward greater U.S. magnet sovereignty and supply chain resilience." About the Genesis Mission The Genesis Mission is a historic national initiative led by the U.S. Department of Energy that is building the world's most powerful integrated science discovery platform. By bringing together government, industry, academia, and philanthropy, the initiative seeks to accelerate breakthroughs in energy, scientific discovery, and national security through a platform that combines artificial intelligence, supercomputing, quantum systems, and advanced scientific instruments. About the Phase I Awards The goal of the Genesis Mission Phase I funding opportunity is to identify promising pathways toward transformative scientific capabilities and establish a foundation for future investment and scale. Awarded teams will design and demonstrate research workflows that integrate AI with scientific investigation while evaluating whether those approaches can accelerate discovery, improve predictive capabilities, enhance experimentation, and generate new scientific insights. Ames National Laboratory is a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science National Laboratory operated by Iowa State University. Ames Laboratory creates innovative materials, technologies, and energy solutions. We use our expertise, unique capabilities, and interdisciplinary collaborations to solve global problems. Ames Laboratory is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy. The Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, please visit https://energy.gov/science . Published In: Materials Sciences and Engineering For Researchers Chemical & Biological Sciences Materials Sciences & Engineering Simulation, Modeling & Decision Science Critical Materials Services and Resources Research Highlights For Industry Work with Us Services and Resources Materials Preparation Center For the Public About Us Visit Ames Lab Education Programs News Careers Contact Us For Employees Privacy and Security DOE Contract DOE Vulnerability Disclosure Program LinkedIn Youtube Facebook Instagram Twitter --> Ames National Laboratory is operated for the U.S. Department of Energy by Iowa State University. 