 Molecular Foundry Skip to main content Skip to main content Skip to footer Molecular Foundry About Foundry Overview Industry @ the Foundry Strategic Priorities Scientific Facilities Strategic Plan Staff Scientific Advisory Board Careers Visit the Foundry Contact Expertise & Instrumentation User Program Overview Apply for Access Prepare to Work Working at the Foundry Project End & Reporting User Projects User Executive Committee Annual User Meeting Industry User FAQ User Program Office News & Events News Science Highlights Seminars Events Foundry in Focus Newsletter Foundry Calendar Impact Publications Nanofacts Industry Stories Foundry Fireside My Foundry Story 20th Anniversary Visual StoryMaps Education and Outreach Safety Resources Staff Resources Career Development Foundry Brand Acknowledging the Foundry Main Content The Molecular Foundry The Molecular Foundry is a Department of Energy-funded nanoscience research facility that provides users from around the world with access to cutting-edge expertise and instrumentation in a collaborative, multidisciplinary environment. New to the Foundry? Learn More > Become a Foundry User Prepare Your Proposal User Portal Instrument Scheduler Join us at the 2026 Annual User Meeting. Register for the meeting Held in Berkeley, CA and online August 20-21, 2026. News & Events News Foundry in Focus – August 2026 Newsletter August 2026 Events Molecular Foundry Fall 2026 Proposal Call August 2026 News Ripple Effects: How Alex Weber-Bargioni Is Fine-Tuning the Future of Quantum Materials August 2026 News 2026 Molecular Foundry Annual Meeting Recap August 2026 News Ferroelectricity Emerges at the Nanoscale August 2026 News How Twelve Turns Air into Jet Fuel July 2026 About The Foundry’s seven research facilities provide free access to experts and instruments to users from around the world. Come join our collaborative, multidisciplinary environment. Expertise & Instrumentation See what the Foundry offers: browse or search the Foundry’s experts, tools, and capabilities. Impact The Foundry is constantly expanding its body of world-class, high-impact research. See how we’re advancing the forefront of nanoscale science. Safety Innovative and productive science is also safe science. Learn how the Foundry integrates safety into every aspect of our organization. User Program Overview Explore our User Program and proposal process. Researchers who intend to publish can get free access to the Foundry and all of its capabilities. Industry Users at the Foundry Researchers from industry can leverage our facility’s capabilities to accelerate their technological development and commercial success. Recent Publications All Publications The Molecular Foundry A Premier Nanoscience Research Institution Visit the Foundry Was this page useful? Send Footer Become a Foundry User Prepare Your Proposal User Portal Instrument Scheduler 