 Energy Department Announces 26 Genesis Mission Science and Technology Challenges to Accelerate AI-Enabled American Innovation and Leadership | BNL Newsroom Because you are not running JavaScript or allowing active scripting, some features on this page may not work. | Enable JavaScript Local Navigation Site Navigation General Lab Information Our Science About Departments Partner With Us Careers News Contact Directory Search Energy & Photon Sciences Center for Functional Nanomaterials Chemistry Condensed Matter Physics & Materials Science Interdisciplinary Science National Synchrotron Light Source II Environment, Biology, Nuclear Science & Nonproliferation Biology Environmental Science and Tech. Nuclear Science and Security Discovery Technologies Accelerator Facilities Division Instrumentation Microelectronics Quantum Information Science & Technology Superconducting Magnet Nuclear & Particle Physics Collider-Accelerator Isotope Research & Production Physics RIKEN BNL Research Center Electron-Ion Collider Computing and Data Sciences Computational Research Systems, Architectures, and Computing Technologies Scientific Computing and Data Facilities Support Orgs Dept. Codes --> Newsroom Media & Communications Office Newsroom Photos Image Library Historic Images Photo Permissions Videos Fact Sheets Lab History News Categories Contact: Peter Genzer , (631) 344-3174 share: Energy Department Announces 26 Genesis Mission Science and Technology Challenges to Accelerate AI-Enabled American Innovation and Leadership February 13, 2026 Editor’s Note: The following news release was issued by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). DOE’s Brookhaven National Laboratory is excited to advance the goals of the “Genesis Mission,” a flagship initiative announced by DOE to double the productivity and impact of American research and innovation within a decade. This effort will harness the power of AI and the capabilities and expertise at national laboratories — including Brookhaven — to establish the U.S. as the global leader in AI-enabled science and security. Brookhaven researchers and industry partners will take on key roles in tackling Genesis Mission science and technology challenges related to manufacturing advanced microelectronics, operating and securing the electric grid, and exploring connections between the smallest building blocks of matter and the largest structures in the universe, among other efforts. Brookhaven will provide critical contributions through its DOE Office of Science user facilities, including the National Synchrotron Light Source II , Center for Functional Nanomaterials , and Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider . For more information about Brookhaven’s contributions, contact Pete Genzer, genzer@bnl.gov , (631) 344-3174. The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) today announced 26 science and technology challenges of national importance to advance the Genesis Mission and accelerate innovation and discovery through artificial intelligence (AI). Building on President Trump’s Executive Orders Launching The Genesis Mission and Removing Barriers to American Leadership In Artificial Intelligence , the challenges span DOE’s discovery science, energy, and national security missions. Each was selected for its potential to deliver measurable benefits for the American people and to accelerate advancements through the Genesis Mission’s AI platforms, world-class facilities, and public-private partnerships. “These challenges represent a bold step toward a future where science moves at the speed of imagination because of AI. It’s a game-changer for science, energy, and national security,” said DOE Under Secretary for Science and Genesis Mission Lead Dr. Darío Gil . “By uniting the U.S. Government’s unparalleled data resources and DOE’s experimental facilities with cutting-edge AI, we can unlock discoveries that will power the economy, secure our energy future, and keep America at the forefront of global innovation.” “President Trump’s Genesis Mission is mobilizing America’s unmatched scientific infrastructure and AI ingenuity to double the pace of discovery. These 26 challenges are a direct call to action to America’s researchers and innovators to join the Genesis Mission and deliver science and technology breakthroughs that will benefit the American people," said Assistant to the President and Director of The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy Michael Kratsios . "We look forward to expanding the list of challenges across Federal agencies to bring even greater impact to the Mission.” Working in partnership with DOE’s National Laboratories, industry, and academia, these efforts will deliver tangible results for the American people. Examples include: Scaling the Grid to Power the American Economy: Using AI to improve power grid planning, interconnection, operations, and security — enabling decisions up to 20–100 times faster and improving electricity cost and reliability by up to 10 percent. Harnessing America’s Historic Nuclear Data: Digitizing eight decades of nuclear research to create a secure, searchable database to inform future energy and security decisions. Enhancing Particle Accelerators for Discovery: Deploying AI to make accelerators adaptive and autonomous, accelerating breakthroughs in medicine, materials, and energy. Designing Materials with Predictable Functionality: Using AI to design materials based on performance goals, shrinking development timelines from decades to months. Unleashing Subsurface Strategic Energy Assets: Applying AI to model underground environments for responsible, cost-effective energy development. Achieving AI-Driven Autonomous Laboratories: Automating experiments to speed discovery of new drugs, advanced materials, and next-generation energy technologies. Reenvisioning Advanced Manufacturing and Industrial Productivity: Bridging research and production with AI-driven systems that strengthen supply chains, improve manufacturing productivity and capability, speed the design to production loop, and create American jobs. Discovering Quantum Algorithms with AI: Accelerating quantum algorithm development to unlock breakthroughs in energy, chemistry, and logistics. Recentering Microelectronics in America: Advancing next-generation microelectronics to secure U.S. technological leadership, economic prosperity, and national security. Through an integrated platform connecting the world’s leading supercomputers, experimental facilities, AI systems, and unique scientific data sets, the Genesis Mission aims to double the productivity and impact of U.S. research and development within a decade. This first set of challenges will demonstrate how AI can deliver faster discovery, stronger energy systems, and lasting leadership in science, technology, and national security. For more details and the full list of challenges, visit here . Brookhaven National Laboratory is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy. The Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit science.energy.gov . Follow @BrookhavenLab on social media. Find us on Instagram , LinkedIn , X , and Facebook . Tags: artificial intelligence 2026-22827 | INT/EXT | Newsroom See All Other Articles... Brookhaven Lab, PsiQuantum Partner to Accelerate Quantum Application Development Using Construct Software Tool Wednesday, September 2, 2026 Brookhaven Lab to Lead $14M AI Project for Nation's Electric Grid Tuesday, September 1, 2026 LZ Sees Surprising Result in Search for Dark Matter Tuesday, September 1, 2026 Nicholas D'Imperio Named Associate Laboratory Director for Computing and Data Sciences at Brookhaven Lab Monday, August 31, 2026 Built for Discovery: LBMS at Five Years Wednesday, August 26, 2026 Brookhaven National Laboratory Brookhaven National Laboratory is a multipurpose research institution funded by the U.S. Department of Energy. Located on Long Island, NY, Brookhaven operates large-scale facilities for studies in physics, chemistry, biology, medicine, applied science, and advanced technology. The Laboratory's almost 3,000 scientists, engineers, and support staff are joined each year by more than 5,000 visiting researchers from around the world. --> Brookhaven National Laboratory PO Box 5000 Upton, NY 11973-5000 (631) 344-8000 Contact us Our Science About History Leadership Visiting the Lab Site Index Staff Directory Careers Facilities Guest Center Guide to Brookhaven Partnerships For Vendors Departments Public Events Technology Licensing Stakeholder Relations Students & Educators Privacy and Security Notice Vulnerability Disclosure Program Federal Laws: Labor | Contractor Brookhaven Science Associates Brookhaven Science Associates manages and operates Brookhaven National Laboratory on behalf of the U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Science. BSA is a partnership between Battelle and The Research Foundation for the State University of New York on behalf of Stony Brook University. | More 