 Energy Department Launches 'Genesis Mission' to Transform American Science and Innovation Through the AI Computing Revolution | BNL Newsroom Because you are not running JavaScript or allowing active scripting, some features on this page may not work. | Enable JavaScript Local Navigation Site Navigation General Lab Information Our Science About Departments Partner With Us Careers News Contact Directory Search Energy & Photon Sciences Center for Functional Nanomaterials Chemistry Condensed Matter Physics & Materials Science Interdisciplinary Science National Synchrotron Light Source II Environment, Biology, Nuclear Science & Nonproliferation Biology Environmental Science and Tech. Nuclear Science and Security Discovery Technologies Accelerator Facilities Division Instrumentation Microelectronics Quantum Information Science & Technology Superconducting Magnet Nuclear & Particle Physics Collider-Accelerator Isotope Research & Production Physics RIKEN BNL Research Center Electron-Ion Collider Computing and Data Sciences Computational Research Systems, Architectures, and Computing Technologies Scientific Computing and Data Facilities Support Orgs Dept. Codes --> Newsroom Media & Communications Office Newsroom Photos Image Library Historic Images Photo Permissions Videos Fact Sheets Lab History News Categories Contact: Karen McNulty Walsh , (631) 344-8350, or Peter Genzer , (631) 344-3174 share: Energy Department Launches 'Genesis Mission' to Transform American Science and Innovation Through the AI Computing Revolution November 24, 2025 Editor’s Note: The following news release was issued today by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). DOE’s Brookhaven National Laboratory is excited to advance the goals of the “Genesis Mission,” a flagship initiative announced by DOE to secure U.S. leadership in artificial intelligence (AI) for science, energy, and national security. This effort will harness the power of AI and the capabilities and expertise at national laboratories — including Brookhaven — to establish the U.S. as the global leader in AI-enabled science and security. Brookhaven researchers and industry partners expect to take on key roles in Genesis Mission projects related to manufacturing advanced microelectronics, operating and securing the electric grid, and exploring connections between the smallest building blocks of matter and the largest structures in the universe, among other efforts. These projects will make use of data and capabilities at Brookhaven’s DOE Office of Science user facilities, including the National Synchrotron Light Source II , Center for Functional Nanomaterials , and Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider . “Brookhaven Lab’s contributions to the Genesis Mission will leverage the Lab’s unique expertise and facilities. We are excited to use AI to address some of the most important challenges that face our nation, including areas such as the electric grid, microelectronics, and discovery science. We will also advance core AI science and technology in areas such as embodied AI and secure AI for the benefit of science and society,” said Brookhaven Lab Interim Director John Hill. For more information about Brookhaven’s contributions, contact Karen McNulty Walsh, kmcnulty@bnl.gov, (631) 344-8350. WASHINGTON — President Trump today issued an Executive Order to launch the Genesis Mission, a historic national effort led by the Department of Energy. The Genesis Mission will transform American science and innovation through the power of artificial intelligence (AI), strengthening the nation’s technological leadership and global competitiveness. The ambitious mission will harness the current AI and advanced computing revolution to double the productivity and impact of American science and engineering within a decade. It will deliver decisive breakthroughs to secure American energy dominance, accelerate scientific discovery, and strengthen national security. “Throughout history, from the Manhattan Project to the Apollo mission, our nation’s brightest minds and industries have answered the call when their nation needed them,” said U.S. Secretary of Energy Chris Wright. “Today, the United States is calling on them once again. Under President Trump’s leadership, the Genesis Mission will unleash the full power of our National Laboratories, supercomputers, and data resources to ensure that America is the global leader in artificial intelligence and to usher in a new golden era of American discovery.” The announcement builds on President Trump’s Executive Order Removing Barriers to American Leadership In Artificial Intelligence and advances his America’s AI Action Plan released earlier this year — a directive to remove barriers to innovation, reduce dependence on foreign adversaries, and unleash the full strength of America’s scientific enterprise. Secretary Wright has designated Under Secretary for Science Darío Gil to lead the initiative. The Genesis Mission will mobilize the Department of Energy’s 17 National Laboratories, industry, and academia to build an integrated discovery platform. The platform will connect the world’s best supercomputers, AI systems, and next-generation quantum systems with the most advanced scientific instruments in the nation. Once complete, the platform will be the world’s most complex and powerful scientific instrument ever built. It will draw on the expertise of roughly 40,000 DOE scientists, engineers, and technical staff, alongside private sector innovators, to ensure that the United States leads and builds the technologies that will define the future. The Genesis Mission will focus on addressing three key challenges of national importance: American energy dominance: The Genesis Mission will accelerate advanced nuclear, fusion, and grid modernization using AI to provide affordable, reliable, and secure energy for Americans. Advancing discovery science: Through DOE’s investment and collaboration with industry, America is building the quantum ecosystem that will power discoveries — and industries — for decades to come. Ensuring national security: DOE will create advanced AI technologies for national security missions, deploy systems to ensure the safety and reliability of the U.S. nuclear stockpile, and accelerate the development of defense-ready materials. ### Additional quotes for media: Under Secretary for Science and Genesis Mission Director, Dr. Darío Gil: “The Genesis Mission marks a defining moment for the next era of American science. We are linking the nation’s most advanced facilities, data, and computing into one closed-loop system to create a scientific instrument for the ages, an engine for discovery that doubles R&D productivity and solves challenges once thought impossible.” Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration, Brandon Williams: “The Genesis Mission represents the next great chapter and an unparallelled opportunity for America’s scientific and national security leadership. “Building on decades of innovation and collaboration across our national laboratories, NNSA will leverage AI, quantum computing, and advanced data analytics that will strengthen our deterrents and ensure the United States maintains an unmatched strategic edge over our adversaries. Under President Trump’s leadership, this mission will embody the very best of American ingenuity, turning science and innovation into security.” Chair of the National Laboratory Directors’ Council, Dr. John Wagner: “DOE’s National Laboratories are engines of discovery that keep the United States competitive and secure. The Genesis Mission unlocks the full potential of these institutions by giving our scientists and engineers tools to work at the speed of innovation. Our laboratories have always risen to meet the nation’s greatest challenges, and this initiative ensures we continue that legacy in the age of artificial intelligence.” Media Inquiries: (202) 586-4940 or DOENews@hq.doe.gov Related Links U.S. Department of Energy News Release White House Executive Order: Launching the Genesis Mission Learn more about the Genesis Mission Tags: artificial intelligence DOE 2025-22725 | INT/EXT | Newsroom See All Other Articles... Brookhaven Lab, PsiQuantum Partner to Accelerate Quantum Application Development Using Construct Software Tool Wednesday, September 2, 2026 Brookhaven Lab to Lead $14M AI Project for Nation's Electric Grid Tuesday, September 1, 2026 LZ Sees Surprising Result in Search for Dark Matter Tuesday, September 1, 2026 Nicholas D'Imperio Named Associate Laboratory Director for Computing and Data Sciences at Brookhaven Lab Monday, August 31, 2026 Built for Discovery: LBMS at Five Years Wednesday, August 26, 2026 Brookhaven National Laboratory Brookhaven National Laboratory is a multipurpose research institution funded by the U.S. Department of Energy. Located on Long Island, NY, Brookhaven operates large-scale facilities for studies in physics, chemistry, biology, medicine, applied science, and advanced technology. The Laboratory's almost 3,000 scientists, engineers, and support staff are joined each year by more than 5,000 visiting researchers from around the world. --> Brookhaven National Laboratory PO Box 5000 Upton, NY 11973-5000 (631) 344-8000 Contact us Our Science About History Leadership Visiting the Lab Site Index Staff Directory Careers Facilities Guest Center Guide to Brookhaven Partnerships For Vendors Departments Public Events Technology Licensing Stakeholder Relations Students & Educators Privacy and Security Notice Vulnerability Disclosure Program Federal Laws: Labor | Contractor Brookhaven Science Associates Brookhaven Science Associates manages and operates Brookhaven National Laboratory on behalf of the U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Science. BSA is a partnership between Battelle and The Research Foundation for the State University of New York on behalf of Stony Brook University. | More 