 Google DeepMind Supports U.S. Department of Energy on Genesis: a National Mission to Accelerate Innovation and Scientific Discovery | BNL Newsroom Because you are not running JavaScript or allowing active scripting, some features on this page may not work. | Enable JavaScript Local Navigation Site Navigation General Lab Information Our Science About Departments Partner With Us Careers News Contact Directory Search Energy & Photon Sciences Center for Functional Nanomaterials Chemistry Condensed Matter Physics & Materials Science Interdisciplinary Science National Synchrotron Light Source II Environment, Biology, Nuclear Science & Nonproliferation Biology Environmental Science and Tech. Nuclear Science and Security Discovery Technologies Accelerator Facilities Division Instrumentation Microelectronics Quantum Information Science & Technology Superconducting Magnet Nuclear & Particle Physics Collider-Accelerator Isotope Research & Production Physics RIKEN BNL Research Center Electron-Ion Collider Computing and Data Sciences Computational Research Systems, Architectures, and Computing Technologies Scientific Computing and Data Facilities Support Orgs Dept. Codes --> Newsroom Media & Communications Office Newsroom Photos Image Library Historic Images Photo Permissions Videos Fact Sheets Lab History News Categories share: Google DeepMind Supports U.S. Department of Energy on Genesis: a National Mission to Accelerate Innovation and Scientific Discovery January 8, 2026 By Pushmeet Kohli and Tom Lue enlarge Editor's note: The following blog post was originally published by Google DeepMind, Google’s artificial intelligence (AI) research laboratory. The post describes Google’s agreement to collaborate with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) on AI, which DOE announced today in a press release outlining agreements with 24 organizations for the Genesis Mission. DOE’s Brookhaven National Laboratory will play key roles in the Genesis Mission, including collaborating with some of these organizations. This work will leverage Brookhaven’s expertise in AI and build on the Lab’s longstanding history of scientific collaboration, such as the founding of the Protein Data Bank, as described in this post. For more information on Brookhaven’s role in the Genesis Mission or the Protein Data Bank, contact Stephanie Rucco ( srucco@bnl.gov , 631-3778671). We stand at an inflection point where the convergence of advanced AI and scientific research promises to unlock a new golden age of discovery . Recognizing this, we’re pleased to support the White House’s Genesis Mission - a historic national effort to use AI to transform how scientific research is conducted and accelerate the speed of American science. The Genesis Mission will mobilize the U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE) 17 National Laboratories, industry and academia to build an integrated discovery platform, accelerating breakthroughs across the nation’s most pressing challenges including energy, scientific discovery, and national security. At Google DeepMind, our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity. There is perhaps no clearer expression of this than the application of AI within science. Scientists today face significant obstacles of unprecedented scale and complexity — from shaping and simulating the intricate dynamics of fusion plasma, to exploring the vast search space of new materials, and finding a way to process and understand ever-growing volumes of data and literature. Modern deep learning methods are uniquely suited to address these challenges and compress the time new discoveries would otherwise require. To help realize the ambitious vision in the Genesis Mission, Google and the DOE are partnering to support the Administration's goal of harnessing the AI and advanced computing revolution to dramatically expand the productivity and impact of American research and innovation within a decade. We see this as the beginning of an enduring partnership in AI for Science that we will look to grow and expand in the months and years ahead. Putting our advanced AI tools into the hands of American scientists Google DeepMind will provide an accelerated access program for scientists at all 17 DOE National Laboratories to our frontier AI for Science models and agentic tools, starting today with AI co-scientist on Google Cloud. AI co-scientist is a multi-agent virtual scientific collaborator built on Gemini, which is trained on Google's world class TPUs. This system is designed to help scientists synthesize vast amounts of information to generate novel hypotheses and research proposals, and accelerate the pace of scientific and biomedical discoveries. AI co-scientist is already showing its potential across diverse biomedical applications. It proposed novel drug repurposing candidates for liver fibrosis that were validated through laboratory experiments and predicted complex antimicrobial resistance mechanisms that matched experiments before they were even published, demonstrating the potential to accelerate hypothesis development from years to days. It’s also showing early promise in additional fields like physics, chemistry, computer science, and more. In early 2026, we will expand our accelerated access program for National Laboratories to include: AlphaEvolve - a Gemini-powered coding agent for designing advanced algorithms that is showing incredible promise for application across many areas in computing and math and, we believe, could be transformative across many more areas such as material science, drug discovery and energy. For example, AlphaEvolve enhanced the efficiency of Google's data centers, chip design and AI training processes — including training the large language models underlying AlphaEvolve itself. AlphaGenome - an AI model to help scientists better understand the non-coding part of DNA, speeding up research on genome biology and improving disease understanding. With more data on plant genomes, AlphaGenome could potentially be extended to help improve crop resistance and other applications including sustainable biofuels and advanced biomaterials. WeatherNext - a state-of-the-art family of weather forecasting models. Our partnership with the U.S. National Hurricane Center already supports their cyclone forecasts and warnings, helping communities prepare for disasters earlier. DOE and all National Laboratories can also access Gemini for Government , which brings together the best of Google’s AI-optimized and accredited commercial cloud with our industry-leading Gemini models - including our most intelligent model Gemini 3 with state-of-the-art reasoning capabilities and multimodal understanding. We’re excited to see what America’s leading researchers will be able to do with our frontier AI models and agentic tools. A history of collaboration for scientific progress We've seen what’s possible when industry-leading technology can build upon the work of the National Laboratories. The foundational work by DOE's Brookhaven National Laboratory on the Protein Data Bank was crucial for the development of AlphaFold, our AI system that can predict the 3D structure of proteins, the development of which was recognized through Demis Hassabis and John Jumper’s co-award of the 2024 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. The AlphaFold Protein Database has now been used by more than three million scientists in over 190 countries to accelerate research, from effective malaria vaccines to groundbreaking gene therapies. Looking ahead Through the Genesis Mission, we'll be accelerating American scientific leadership by also exploring research collaborations with National Laboratories in areas including fusion energy , new materials discovery and earth science . The challenges facing our world—from energy to disease to security—demand unprecedented scientific innovation. By combining human ingenuity with advanced AI capabilities, we believe we can help America's scientists achieve discoveries that would have seemed impossible just years ago. Tags: artificial intelligence 2026-22774 | INT/EXT | Newsroom See All Other Articles... Brookhaven Lab, PsiQuantum Partner to Accelerate Quantum Application Development Using Construct Software Tool Wednesday, September 2, 2026 Brookhaven Lab to Lead $14M AI Project for Nation's Electric Grid Tuesday, September 1, 2026 LZ Sees Surprising Result in Search for Dark Matter Tuesday, September 1, 2026 Nicholas D'Imperio Named Associate Laboratory Director for Computing and Data Sciences at Brookhaven Lab Monday, August 31, 2026 Built for Discovery: LBMS at Five Years Wednesday, August 26, 2026 Brookhaven National Laboratory Brookhaven National Laboratory is a multipurpose research institution funded by the U.S. Department of Energy. Located on Long Island, NY, Brookhaven operates large-scale facilities for studies in physics, chemistry, biology, medicine, applied science, and advanced technology. The Laboratory's almost 3,000 scientists, engineers, and support staff are joined each year by more than 5,000 visiting researchers from around the world. --> Brookhaven National Laboratory PO Box 5000 Upton, NY 11973-5000 (631) 344-8000 Contact us Our Science About History Leadership Visiting the Lab Site Index Staff Directory Careers Facilities Guest Center Guide to Brookhaven Partnerships For Vendors Departments Public Events Technology Licensing Stakeholder Relations Students & Educators Privacy and Security Notice Vulnerability Disclosure Program Federal Laws: Labor | Contractor Brookhaven Science Associates Brookhaven Science Associates manages and operates Brookhaven National Laboratory on behalf of the U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Science. BSA is a partnership between Battelle and The Research Foundation for the State University of New York on behalf of Stony Brook University. | More 