 Energy Department Announces $7M for Quantum Technology Outposts in Fundamental Physics | BNL Newsroom Because you are not running JavaScript or allowing active scripting, some features on this page may not work. | Enable JavaScript Local Navigation Site Navigation General Lab Information Our Science About Departments Partner With Us Careers News Contact Directory Search Energy & Photon Sciences Center for Functional Nanomaterials Chemistry Condensed Matter Physics & Materials Science Interdisciplinary Science National Synchrotron Light Source II Environment, Biology, Nuclear Science & Nonproliferation Biology Environmental Science and Tech. Nuclear Science and Security Discovery Technologies Accelerator Facilities Division Instrumentation Microelectronics Quantum Information Science & Technology Superconducting Magnet Nuclear & Particle Physics Collider-Accelerator Isotope Research & Production Physics RIKEN BNL Research Center Electron-Ion Collider Computing and Data Sciences Computational Research Systems, Architectures, and Computing Technologies Scientific Computing and Data Facilities Support Orgs Dept. Codes --> Newsroom Media & Communications Office Newsroom Photos Image Library Historic Images Photo Permissions Videos Fact Sheets Lab History News Categories share: Energy Department Announces $7M for Quantum Technology Outposts in Fundamental Physics Projects Will Enable Scientific Breakthroughs through Quantum Technology August 13, 2026 enlarge An aerial view of the future Electron-Ion Collider (EIC) complex at Brookhaven National Laboratory. The EIC will reuse key infrastructure from the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider, including its accelerator tunnel and other components. (Kevin Coughlin/Brookhaven National Laboratory) Editor's note: The following news release was originally issued by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). DOE’s Brookhaven National Laboratory will lead one of the eight newly funded Quantum Technology Outpost projects, called “Quantum Information Signatures at Colliders,” in collaboration with the University of Pittsburgh. Researchers will develop new ways to investigate the quantum information carried by particles in collisions at facilities like the Large Hadron Collider and the future Electron-Ion Collider . By learning how quantum information flows through a high-energy collision, including how particles become “entangled,” researchers aim to uncover phenomena that cannot be seen through traditional techniques and identify clues about physics beyond the Standard Model. For more information about this project, please contact Stephanie Rucco ( srucco@bnl.gov , 631-344-8671). Today, DOE announced $7.3 million in funding for eight projects that will explore the application of quantum information science and technology to new experiments and simulations in high energy physics, broadening the reach of new techniques and unlocking new potential for scientific breakthroughs. These projects will apply the unique tools, techniques, and concepts of quantum information science to the unique science mission of Department of Energy’s Office of High Energy Physics. In particular, these projects will develop new quantum sensors and applications for quantum computers that yield new insights at the very high energies seen in particle collider experiments and in the high-intensity environments of neutrino experiments such as DOE’s Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE) currently under construction. The new projects show DOE’s vital contribution to multiple national priorities. By pushing the cutting-edge of quantum science and technology, and by working to apply and integrate that technological progress into our mission, DOE is a key participant in the National Quantum Initiative and the President’s recent Executive Order on Ushering in the Next Frontier of Quantum Innovation. These projects, by utilizing next-generation computing technology to accelerate scientific discovery, are also key elements of the Genesis Mission, particularly the Quantum Genesis initiative, which seeks to deliver scientifically relevant quantum computing to the nation by 2028. Projects were selected through competitive, external merit review process under DOE’s “Quantum Outposts on the Energy and Intensity Frontiers” program. Total funding is $7.3 million for projects lasting up to three years in duration, with $3.2 million in Fiscal Year 2026 dollars and outyear funding contingent on congressional appropriations. The list of projects and more information can be found on the HEP funding awards page. Selection for award negotiations is not a commitment by DOE to issue an award or provide funding. Before funding is issued, DOE and the applicants will undergo a negotiation process, and DOE may cancel negotiations and rescind the selection for any reason during that time. Tags: DOE high energy physics physics quantum information science 2026-23107 | INT/EXT | Newsroom See All Other Articles... Brookhaven Lab, PsiQuantum Partner to Accelerate Quantum Application Development Using Construct Software Tool Wednesday, September 2, 2026 Brookhaven Lab to Lead $14M AI Project for Nation's Electric Grid Tuesday, September 1, 2026 LZ Sees Surprising Result in Search for Dark Matter Tuesday, September 1, 2026 Nicholas D'Imperio Named Associate Laboratory Director for Computing and Data Sciences at Brookhaven Lab Monday, August 31, 2026 Built for Discovery: LBMS at Five Years Wednesday, August 26, 2026 Brookhaven National Laboratory Brookhaven National Laboratory is a multipurpose research institution funded by the U.S. Department of Energy. Located on Long Island, NY, Brookhaven operates large-scale facilities for studies in physics, chemistry, biology, medicine, applied science, and advanced technology. The Laboratory's almost 3,000 scientists, engineers, and support staff are joined each year by more than 5,000 visiting researchers from around the world. --> Brookhaven National Laboratory PO Box 5000 Upton, NY 11973-5000 (631) 344-8000 Contact us Our Science About History Leadership Visiting the Lab Site Index Staff Directory Careers Facilities Guest Center Guide to Brookhaven Partnerships For Vendors Departments Public Events Technology Licensing Stakeholder Relations Students & Educators Privacy and Security Notice Vulnerability Disclosure Program Federal Laws: Labor | Contractor Brookhaven Science Associates Brookhaven Science Associates manages and operates Brookhaven National Laboratory on behalf of the U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Science. BSA is a partnership between Battelle and The Research Foundation for the State University of New York on behalf of Stony Brook University. | More 