 Brookhaven and Stony Brook Researchers Demonstrate 'Wireless' Capability for Quantum Network | BNL Newsroom Because you are not running JavaScript or allowing active scripting, some features on this page may not work. | Enable JavaScript Local Navigation Site Navigation General Lab Information Our Science About Departments Partner With Us Careers News Contact Directory Search Energy & Photon Sciences Center for Functional Nanomaterials Chemistry Condensed Matter Physics & Materials Science Interdisciplinary Science National Synchrotron Light Source II Environment, Biology, Nuclear Science & Nonproliferation Biology Environmental Science and Tech. Nuclear Science and Security Discovery Technologies Accelerator Facilities Division Instrumentation Microelectronics Quantum Information Science & Technology Superconducting Magnet Nuclear & Particle Physics Collider-Accelerator Isotope Research & Production Physics RIKEN BNL Research Center Electron-Ion Collider Computing and Data Sciences Computational Research Systems, Architectures, and Computing Technologies Scientific Computing and Data Facilities Support Orgs Dept. Codes --> Newsroom Media & Communications Office Newsroom Photos Image Library Historic Images Photo Permissions Videos Fact Sheets Lab History News Categories Contact: Danielle Roedel , (631) 344-2347, or Peter Genzer , (631) 344-3174 share: Brookhaven and Stony Brook Researchers Demonstrate 'Wireless' Capability for Quantum Network First-of-its-kind free-space optical link begins quantum entanglement experiments August 21, 2026 enlarge On Friday, Aug. 21, U.S. Department of Energy Under Secretary for Science Darío Gil cut a ribbon blocking the receiving aperture of Brookhaven's Quantum Lighthouse, allowing photons from Stony Brook's Quantum Watchtower to reach Brookhaven's detector. Leaders from Brookhaven and Stony Brook, as well as local, state, and federal government officials, joined Gil to celebrate the successful transmission of entangled photons between the two institutions — a key milestone toward extending the nation's longest quantum network beyond the limits of fiber-optic cable. Pictured from left to right are: Empire State Development Board Chairman Kevin Law, Brookhaven National Laboratory Director John Hill, Secretary to New York State Governor Kathy Hochul Karen Persichilli Keogh, U.S. Department of Energy Under Secretary for Science Darío Gil, Stony Brook University President Andrea Goldsmith, Brookhaven Lab scientist Justine Haupt. (Kevin Coughlin/Brookhaven National Laboratory) Editor's note: The following press release is being jointly issued by the U.S. Department of Energy’s Brookhaven National Laboratory and the State University of New York at Stony Brook University. UPTON and STONY BROOK, N.Y. — Researchers at the U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE) Brookhaven National Laboratory and the State University of New York at Stony Brook (Stony Brook University) have successfully transmitted light particles containing quantum information through open air between the two institutions. This is the first demonstration of its kind in the United States and a key milestone toward extending the nation’s longest quantum network — already connecting eight nodes across several institutions — beyond the limits of fiber-optic cables. “The future of quantum information science will depend not only on what individual quantum computers and devices can do but on our ability to connect them,” said DOE Under Secretary for Science Darío Gil. “As DOE advances its Genesis Mission, we are building toward an interconnected research ecosystem where advanced computing, artificial intelligence, and quantum technologies can work together to tackle some of our most complex scientific challenges. The capabilities demonstrated by Brookhaven Lab and Stony Brook University today are an important step toward making that vision possible.” During a daytime demonstration on Friday, Aug. 21, researchers used a laser to generate quantum states of light, each containing just a few individual photons, in Stony Brook University’s state-of-the-art Quantum Watchtower . From the Watchtower, located on the roof of Stony Brook’s Health Sciences Center in Stony Brook, New York, the photons exited the core of an optical fiber only about 5 microns in diameter — less than one-tenth the width of a human hair — and traversed 13 miles (21 kilometers) to Brookhaven’s Quantum Lighthouse in Upton, New York. enlarge A map shows Brookhaven National Laboratory, Stony Brook University, and Yale University — the three institutions hosting facilities that form a free-space optical (FSO) link. The FSO link, used to transmit particles of light containing quantum information between institutions, adds a wireless component to the nation's longest quantum network. Researchers have successfully transmitted entangled photons from Stony Brook's Quantum Watchtower to Brookhaven's Quantum Lighthouse. The connection between Stony Brook and Yale is currently under development. (Jennifer Abramowitz/Brookhaven National Laboratory) In the Lighthouse, Gil cut a ribbon blocking the receiving aperture, allowing the photons to reach the detector. Researchers and distinguished guests gathered in the Quantum Lighthouse — built on top of the only Brookhaven Lab building with a clear line of sight to Stony Brook University — to watch as an ultrafast camera marked the photons’ arrival in an equally small optical fiber. The daytime demonstration showcased the extraordinary precision of this free-space optical (FSO) link between the two institutions, with researchers transmitting photons between fiber-optic cables that are only a fraction of a millimeter in diameter and separated by several miles. But the team has already progressed to the next phase of experimentation using entangled photons — pairs of light particles that are intrinsically linked by the laws of quantum mechanics. During nighttime tests, when there are lower levels of background light, the researchers successfully sent entangled photons from the Stony Brook physics laboratory to the Quantum Watchtower via fiber, then distributed them across the new FSO link, and successfully received and measured them at the Quantum Lighthouse. This is a key advance toward achieving sustained “wireless” exchange of quantum information between the two institutions — and eventually beyond. The FSO link — which includes the Quantum Lighthouse and Quantum Watchtower, along with a third facility under development at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut — adds a wireless component to the record-setting quantum network currently spanning 161 miles and several institutions across Long Island and the New York metropolitan area. enlarge A Brookhaven Lab team of scientists, engineers, students, and leaders stand outside the Lab's Quantum Lighthouse — a state-of-the-art facility located on the rooftop of a seven-story building. This collaboration developed the adaptive optics technology essential for the free-space optical link connecting Brookhaven, Stony Brook University, and Yale University. Back row, left to right: Shresht Joshi, John Jerome, Samuel Woronick, Chris Otto, Sven Herrmann, and Gabriella Carini. Front row, left to right: Steven Andrade, Lev Leites, Matthew Rumore, Paul Stankus, and Justine Haupt. Team members not pictured include Michael Keach, Sonali Gera, and Aaron Mueninghoff. (David Rahner/Brookhaven National Laboratory) Using this network, pioneered by Stony Brook and Brookhaven Lab, researchers can transmit entangled photons through commercial fiber. Because the particles remain entangled even when separated by long distances, measuring one photon instantly reveals information about its counterpart. This property, often referred to as “spooky action at a distance,” is key for the future of ultra-secure communications, advanced quantum sensing, and networked quantum computing. "In our long-distance fiber network, we routinely transmit entangled pairs of photons. However, such fiber networks are limited to the use of telecom wavelengths. In our new quantum wireless links, we are exploring the use of infrared wavelengths that are native to quantum processors and related technologies," said Eden Figueroa, director of Stony Brook’s Quantum Institute, endowed presidential professor of physics in the Department of Physics and Astronomy in the College of Arts and Sciences, and a joint appointee at Brookhaven Lab. "This will provide a direct route to create entangled atomic systems across long distances." State University of New York at Stony Brook President Andrea Goldsmith said, “Extending our quantum communication network to include a wireless link is a major leap forward in our development of the Quantum Internet of Things. I’m thrilled that our brilliant Stony Brook researchers, together with our partners at Brookhaven National Laboratory, have demonstrated impressive progress in overcoming the significant challenges of sending quantum information wirelessly via entangled photons. By unlocking wireless quantum connectivity and incorporating it into the world’s only metropolitan-area network that supports quantum communication via entanglement, we are transforming secure data transmission while igniting Long Island as an innovation hub. We are profoundly grateful to our elected officials, Governor Hochul, Senator Schumer, Senator Gillibrand, and Rep. LaLota for their generous support and for securing investments in Long Island's quantum research. Ultimately, this places New York State at the forefront of quantum information science and its application to secure communication for finance, healthcare, and cybersecurity.” enlarge Ph.D. student Rishikesh Gokhale (left) and Eden Figueroa (right) in the Quantum Watchtower. (Stony Brook University/John Griffin) Building the FSO link In some ways, the classical internet’s evolution from wired connections to a complex network of wired and wireless technologies provides a roadmap for reaching milestones toward a global quantum network. But the researchers also needed to draw on expertise from a seemingly unrelated field: astronomy. Today’s classical wireless technologies, including cell phones and orbiting satellites, use radio frequencies to transmit information without a physical connection. But radio frequencies are far too noisy to preserve fragile quantum information. Instead, the researchers turned to optical light for sending quantum signals through open air. “People think of telescopes as tools for looking up into space, but the same technologies that allow astronomers to precisely collect and control light are essential for these quantum experiments,” said Justine Haupt, Brookhaven Lab’s lead scientist on the cross-institutional FSO link project. enlarge Brookhaven Lab Associate Laboratory Director for Discovery Technologies Gabriella Carini (left) and Brookhaven Lab scientist Justine Haupt (right) stand in Brookhaven's Quantum Lighthouse — a state-of-the-art rooftop facility equipped with lenses, mirrors, and other optical instruments. Researchers use this technology to transmit and receive particles of light carrying quantum information. (David Rahner/Brookhaven National Laboratory) Haupt and her colleagues at Brookhaven are experts when it comes to telescopes, having built key components for several high-profile astronomy projects. But because there is more turbulent atmosphere between Brookhaven Lab and Stony Brook University than there is between Earth and the stars, the scientists needed to develop technology sophisticated enough to ensure the photons could travel between institutions without becoming distorted or losing their fragile quantum information. But that was only one piece of a much larger puzzle. “Both Brookhaven and Stony Brook needed to build specialized rooftop facilities for the telescope systems that were optimized for quantum experiments,” Haupt said. “We needed to integrate the optics, controls, communications, quantum sources, and detectors so equipment 21 kilometers apart could operate as one experiment. Bringing all those pieces together — and then adding the quantum layer — is what makes this capability unique.” “New York State is committed to investing in cutting-edge research and innovation in emerging fields that move our society forward,” New York Gov. Kathy Hochul said. “The partnership between the State University of New York at Stony Brook and Brookhaven National Laboratory serves as an excellent example of how collaboration can advance discovery and create transformative technologies.” At 12:26 a.m. ET on Wednesday, Aug. 19, researchers at Brookhaven Lab's Quantum Lighthouse detected entangled photons arriving from Stony Brook's Quantum Watchtower. The graph's uptick on the far right around 0:37, coinciding with the "Entanglement Source ON" text, marks the arrival of entangled photons. (Brookhaven National Laboratory) Looking ahead Yale’s facility — the third leg of the FSO link — was recently completed, and the researchers will soon begin establishing the Stony Brook-Yale connection so they can also transmit entangled photons 30 miles (48 kilometers) across the Long Island Sound. “While completing this longer leg, the team is simultaneously moving toward one of our ultimate goals: transmitting quantum information through Earth’s atmosphere to orbiting satellites,” said Brookhaven Lab Associate Laboratory Director for Discovery Technologies Gabriella Carini. “Incorporating satellites into the network could help bring secure quantum communications to rural or remote locations with minimal ground-based telecommunications infrastructure, transforming the quantum network from a regional one to a global one.” Expanding beyond the limits of fiber also opens the door to new kinds of quantum experiments by enabling researchers to use photons with wavelengths, or “colors,” different from the telecommunications wavelengths optimized for commercial fibers. Many quantum technologies naturally operate at these other wavelengths, making free-space links a promising path toward linking quantum devices across long distances. Researchers ultimately envision using the FSO link to connect quantum computers at Brookhaven and Stony Brook — and beyond — enabling them to work together and tackle some of the nation’s most pressing scientific challenges. enlarge On Wednesday, Aug. 19, researchers at Brookhaven Lab's Quantum Lighthouse detected entangled photons arriving from Stony Brook's Quantum Watchtower. The diverging of the red and blue lines in the top plot, as well as the difference between the red and blue bars in the bottom graph, indicate an increase in detected photons (red, on-phase rate) compared to the background counts (blue, off-phase rate). This data confirmed that researchers in the Lighthouse saw the quantum signal. (Brookhaven National Laboratory) “Brookhaven has long been at the forefront of quantum information science, and this achievement represents another important step in that journey,” said Brookhaven Lab Director John Hill. “This free-space link is a key milestone in its own right, but it is also part of a much larger roadmap leading to distributed quantum systems. We will continue advancing the network’s capabilities so that researchers can connect increasingly sophisticated quantum systems together to address a range of problems, from computation to communication to sensing, in ways that just aren’t possible today.” U.S. Rep. Nick LaLota said, “Under Secretary Gil’s return to Brookhaven National Lab is another reminder that some of the world’s most important scientific work is happening right here in Suffolk County. Quantum research will play a major role in shaping the technologies we rely on every day, while strengthening our national security and ensuring America remains at the forefront of scientific innovation. At a time when Washington must spend taxpayer dollars wisely, I’m focused on prioritizing smart, targeted investments in projects and partnerships at Brookhaven and Stony Brook that support good-paying Long Island jobs, advance groundbreaking research, and keep America leading the world in innovation.” Empire State Development Board Chairman Kevin Law said, “Long Island has long been home to some of the world’s most important scientific institutions, and today’s milestone demonstrates what is possible when those institutions work together. The partnership between Stony Brook University and Brookhaven National Laboratory is helping establish Long Island as a leader in quantum technology and positioning the region to attract talent, investment, and future economic growth for years to come.” The work at Brookhaven Lab is primarily supported by the DOE Office of Science. At Stony Brook University, the work is supported by the National Science Foundation and New York's Empire State Development. Brookhaven National Laboratory is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy. The Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit science.energy.gov . Follow @BrookhavenLab on social media. Find us on Instagram , LinkedIn , X , and Facebook . About The State University of New York at Stony Brook (Stony Brook University) The State University of New York at Stony Brook is New York’s flagship university and No. 1 public university. It is part of the State University of New York (SUNY) system. With more than 27,000 students, more than 3,000 faculty members, more than 237,000 alumni, a premier academic healthcare system and 18 NCAA Division I athletic programs, Stony Brook is a research-intensive distinguished center of innovation dedicated to addressing the world’s biggest challenges. The university embraces its mission to provide comprehensive undergraduate, graduate and professional education of the highest quality, and is ranked as the #59 overall university and #26 among public universities in the nation by U.S. News & World Report’s Best Colleges listing. Fostering a commitment to academic research and intellectual endeavors, Stony Brook’s membership in the Association of American Universities (AAU) places it among the top 71 research institutions in North America. The university’s distinguished faculty have earned esteemed awards such as the Nobel Prize, Pulitzer Prize, Indianapolis Prize for animal conservation, Abel Prize, Fields Medal, Breakthrough prizes in mathematics and physics, and MacArthur Fellows Genius Grants. Stony Brook has the responsibility of co-managing Brookhaven National Laboratory for the U.S. Department of Energy — one of only eight universities with a role in running a national laboratory. Providing economic growth for neighboring communities and the wider geographic region, the university totals an impressive $8.93 billion in increased economic output on Long Island. Follow us on Facebook https://www.facebook.com/stonybrooku/ and X @stonybrooku . Related Links The Quantum Lighthouse: Extending Quantum Networks Beyond Fiber The Quantum Watchtower: Stony Brook Sets Cybersecurity Sights on Quantum Wireless Networking and Teleportation Governor Hochul Announces Milestone in Expansion of New York State's Quantum Communications Network Tags: instrumentation quantum information science Stony Brook University 2026-23096 | INT/EXT | Newsroom See All Other Articles... Brookhaven Lab, PsiQuantum Partner to Accelerate Quantum Application Development Using Construct Software Tool Wednesday, September 2, 2026 Brookhaven Lab to Lead $14M AI Project for Nation's Electric Grid Tuesday, September 1, 2026 LZ Sees Surprising Result in Search for Dark Matter Tuesday, September 1, 2026 Nicholas D'Imperio Named Associate Laboratory Director for Computing and Data Sciences at Brookhaven Lab Monday, August 31, 2026 Built for Discovery: LBMS at Five Years Wednesday, August 26, 2026 Brookhaven National Laboratory Brookhaven National Laboratory is a multipurpose research institution funded by the U.S. Department of Energy. Located on Long Island, NY, Brookhaven operates large-scale facilities for studies in physics, chemistry, biology, medicine, applied science, and advanced technology. The Laboratory's almost 3,000 scientists, engineers, and support staff are joined each year by more than 5,000 visiting researchers from around the world. --> Brookhaven National Laboratory PO Box 5000 Upton, NY 11973-5000 (631) 344-8000 Contact us Our Science About History Leadership Visiting the Lab Site Index Staff Directory Careers Facilities Guest Center Guide to Brookhaven Partnerships For Vendors Departments Public Events Technology Licensing Stakeholder Relations Students & Educators Privacy and Security Notice Vulnerability Disclosure Program Federal Laws: Labor | Contractor Brookhaven Science Associates Brookhaven Science Associates manages and operates Brookhaven National Laboratory on behalf of the U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Science. BSA is a partnership between Battelle and The Research Foundation for the State University of New York on behalf of Stony Brook University. | More 