 U.S. Department of Energy invests in Fermilab projects to accelerate AI-enabled scientific discovery Home About Jobs Contact Phone book Science Particle Physics Particle Accelerators Detectors, Computing, Quantum Particle Physics 101 DUNE at LBNF Newsroom News and features Press releases Fermilab in the news Fact sheets Media contacts Subscribe to our public newsletter Social media Community Hours and public access Tours, programs and events Calendar of public events Education programs Lederman Science Center Subscribe to our public newsletter Resources Employees Researchers Job seekers Public Neighbors Industry Business Visitors Students and teachers Media Search Home About Jobs Contact Phone book Search Science Particle Physics Particle Accelerators Detectors, Computing, Quantum Particle Physics 101 DUNE at LBNF Newsroom News and features Press releases Fermilab in the news Fact sheets Media contacts Subscribe to our public newsletter Social media Community Hours and public access Tours, programs and events Calendar of public events Education programs Lederman Science Center Subscribe to our public newsletter Resources Employees Researchers Job seekers Public Neighbors Industry Business Visitors Students and teachers Media Facebook X (Twitter) Instagram YouTube LinkedIn Press release U.S. Department of Energy invests in Fermilab projects to accelerate AI-enabled scientific discovery July 22, 2026 Tags: AI Genesis Mission Newsroom News and features Press releases Fermilab in the news Fact sheets Contact us Site search Menu Newsroom News and features Press releases Fermilab in the news Fact sheets Contact us Site search The awards will support Fermilab projects by leveraging AI to boost innovation and technology development, advance DOE’s Genesis Mission and accelerate scientific discovery. Media contact Tracy Marc, Fermilab media@fnal.gov , 224-290-7803 The Department of Energy announced today the list of projects that will receive funding through the Genesis Mission: Transforming Science and Energy with AI. Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory was selected for a portfolio of initiatives, including the AI/ML project led by Fermilab and eight others in which the lab is a key collaborator. These awards position Fermilab as a strong contributor to the Genesis Mission and demonstrate the lab’s leadership in applying artificial intelligence and advanced technologies to accelerate scientific discovery. “Fermilab is honored to receive this support for advancing artificial intelligence as part of DOE’s Genesis Mission . This investment strengthens our ability to accelerate scientific discovery, develop next‑generation technologies, and drive innovation at the frontiers of particle physics and advanced technology,” Fermilab Director Norbert Holtkamp said. “We are proud to contribute our expertise to a mission that will help shape the next era of U.S. leadership in science and technology.” DOE announced the first phase of the Genesis Mission awards today, in which Fermilab received funding for an AI/ML project they are leading and eight others in which the lab is contributing. Credit: Ryan Postel, Fermilab The Fermilab-led project will develop AI/ML-based resonance control algorithms to enable high-reliability, low-cost accelerator operations that will substantially improve the performance of particle accelerators that drive discovery science. Several partner institutions, including national labs, universities and industry partner xLight Inc., are contributing to this project. The Genesis Mission is a historic national initiative led by the U.S. Department of Energy, which is building the world’s most powerful integrated science discovery platform. By uniting government, industry, academia and philanthropy, it is accelerating breakthroughs in energy, scientific discovery and national security through a new platform that combines AI, supercomputing, quantum systems and advanced scientific instruments. The projects named today will receive funding through a Request For Applications (RFA) that was announced by DOE in March. The goal of the Phase I RFA awards is to identify promising pathways toward transformative scientific capabilities and establish a foundation for future investment and scale. Fermilab project teams will design and demonstrate research workflows that integrate AI with scientific investigation, while rigorously evaluating whether those approaches can accelerate discovery, improve predictive capabilities, enhance experimentation, or generate new scientific insights. Fermilab participated in today’s Genesis Mission Summit as a recipient of a first‑round Genesis Mission award, underscoring its leadership in advanced accelerator technologies as the Department of Energy announced the selected projects. The AI/ML algorithms that will emerge from the Fermilab-led project will increase science reach, improve stability for users, increase radio-frequency amplifier lifetime and reduce operating costs. Superconducting radio-frequency (SRF) cavities are electromagnetic resonators that transfer energy to beams in particle accelerators. Because they are extremely efficient resonators, they can be disturbed by small vibrations and pressure fluctuations. For current and future SRF-based accelerators like Fermilab’s Proton Improvement Plan-II (PIP-II) linear accelerator, SLAC National Laboratory’s Linac Coherent Light Source-SC, Brookhaven National Laboratory’s Electron-Ion Collider (EIC), Michigan State University’s Facility for Rare Isotope Beams, Argonne National Laboratory’s Argonne Tandem Linac Accelerator System, and industrial accelerators, it is vitally important to have precise control of the cavity resonant frequency. “These awards recognize the tremendous opportunity to combine artificial intelligence with Fermilab’s world-leading expertise in superconducting accelerator technology,” said Anna Grassellino, chief technology officer and associate laboratory director for the Technology Directorate at Fermilab. “By developing AI-driven control of superconducting RF cavities, we can make future accelerators — such as our own PIP-II — more efficient, reliable, and autonomous, enabling higher scientific performance while reducing operational complexity. This is an important step toward a new generation of intelligent accelerator facilities that will power discoveries across particle physics and many other fields of science.” Fermilab will contribute as a key collaborator on several other projects aligned with core research areas of the lab such as neutrino and collider physics, the muon-to-electron-conversion experiment (Mu2e), precision frontier, the Electron-Ion Collider and advanced scientific computing. The following projects were selected for funding through the Genesis Mission: How AI will expedite discovery in highly complex electron-ion collider data streams Lead institution: Purdue University Using an AI-driven approach to detect anomalies in the CMS Level-1 Scouting System Lead institution: University of Colorado Standardizing and advancing high-performance computing workloads using AI Lead institution: University of Wisconsin-Madison Using agentic workflows for the expedited search and discovery of charged lepton flavor violation in Mu2e Lead institution: University of South Carolina Deployment of advanced AI accelerated systems to detect, identify, classify and communicate supernova events in real time for the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE) Lead institution: Duke University The use of AI agents for high-energy physics simulations and analysis operations Lead institution: University of Alabama Accelerating DUNE physics with AI to discover neutrino interaction uncertainties Lead institution: Florida State University Physics-driven digital twins simulations for fusion magnet systems Lead institution: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Fermilab is an international leader in particle accelerator science research, which generates massive streams of data for scientific discovery using accelerator and detector technologies. The lab’s high-energy physics research creates unique opportunities for AI innovations. That is why researchers are developing and implementing AI tools to improve the precision of measurements, optimizing operations and accelerating discovery. Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory is America’s national laboratory for particle physics and accelerator research. Fermi Forward Discovery Group manages Fermilab for the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science. Visit Fermilab’s website at www.fnal.gov and follow us on social media. Recommended reading View all news DOE selects Fermilab-led AI initiative to advance particle accelerator performance August 20, 2026 accelerator AI SRF cavities Fermilab feature In a project selected for funding by the Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory and partners from other national laboratories, universities and industry will apply artificial intelligence and machine learning to enable precise and adaptive resonance control in particle accelerators. Their work aims to lower operating costs by millions of dollars each year and improve accelerator performance, driving scientific discovery. DUNE uses AI to transform the future of neutrino research August 6, 2026 AI DUNE neutrino Fermilab feature DUNE is pioneering the future of neutrino research by integrating artificial intelligence into its experiment, drawing on decades of machine learning work at Fermilab. Fermilab storage infrastructure enables AI-driven scientific and research discovery for DOE’s Genesis Mission June 11, 2026 AI computing Genesis Mission Fermilab feature The U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission is building a new era of AI-driven scientific discovery — and it requires far more than powerful supercomputers to succeed. To support this national effort, Fermilab’s Fermi Data Platform is providing secure, large-scale data infrastructure needed to make advanced AI research possible across the American Science Cloud. We bring the world together to solve the mysteries of matter, energy, space and time. Subscribe to our newsletters About Community Newsroom Contact Resources For Employees For Industry Jobs Science DUNE at LBNF Particle Physics Particle Accelerators Detectors, Computing, Quantum Particle Physics 101 Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory Managed by Fermi Forward Discovery Group, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science Security, Privacy, Legal | Use of Cookies 