 US Department of Energy launches ‘Genesis Mission’ to transform American science and innovation through the AI computing revolution Home About Jobs Contact Phone book Science Particle Physics Particle Accelerators Detectors, Computing, Quantum Particle Physics 101 DUNE at LBNF Newsroom News and features Press releases Fermilab in the news Fact sheets Media contacts Subscribe to our public newsletter Social media Community Hours and public access Tours, programs and events Calendar of public events Education programs Lederman Science Center Subscribe to our public newsletter Resources Employees Researchers Job seekers Public Neighbors Industry Business Visitors Students and teachers Media Search Home About Jobs Contact Phone book Search Science Particle Physics Particle Accelerators Detectors, Computing, Quantum Particle Physics 101 DUNE at LBNF Newsroom News and features Press releases Fermilab in the news Fact sheets Media contacts Subscribe to our public newsletter Social media Community Hours and public access Tours, programs and events Calendar of public events Education programs Lederman Science Center Subscribe to our public newsletter Resources Employees Researchers Job seekers Public Neighbors Industry Business Visitors Students and teachers Media Facebook X (Twitter) Instagram YouTube LinkedIn Press release US Department of Energy launches ‘Genesis Mission’ to transform American science and innovation through the AI computing revolution November 25, 2025 Tags: AI artificial intelligence DOE Newsroom News and features Press releases Fermilab in the news Fact sheets Contact us Site search Menu Newsroom News and features Press releases Fermilab in the news Fact sheets Contact us Site search President Trump issued an Executive Order on November 24 to launch the Genesis Mission, a historic national effort led by the US Department of Energy. Media contact Tracy Marc, Fermilab media@fnal.gov , 224-290-7803 This press release was originally posted by the Department of Energy on November 24, 2025. Editor’s note: The US Department of Energy’s Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory is at the forefront of developing artificial intelligence algorithms to drive advancements in science and society. Through the Genesis Mission, Fermilab will help reimagine the scientific process using AI to accelerate scientific discovery. “Fermilab’s dedication to world-class research is rooted in using AI and machine learning in solving the mysteries of matter, energy, space and time. This has allowed us to accelerate our innovation capacity in quantum and particle physics research,” said Fermilab interim director Young-Kee Kim. “We are excited to play a significant role in the Genesis AI Initiative and help lead in a new age of American discovery science.” In coordination with the DOE’s mission to advance artificial intelligence, Fermilab aims to transform discovery science by advancing quantum-computing paradigms, which will deepen our understanding of the laws of nature and the cosmos. From our world-class accelerator complex and the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment to cutting-edge quantum devices and innovative microelectronics, Fermilab builds and operates some of the most complex scientific endeavors in the world. Our researchers have wide-ranging expertise in AI-enabled sensing, serving massive AI-ready data sets with a deep understanding of the underlying physics and instruments. These advancements push the boundaries of technology, driving innovation that leads to broader societal impacts . President Trump today issued an Executive Order to launch the Genesis Mission, a historic national effort led by the Department of Energy. The Genesis Mission will transform American science and innovation through the power of artificial intelligence (AI), strengthening the nation’s technological leadership and global competitiveness. The ambitious mission will harness the current AI and advanced computing revolution to double the productivity and impact of American science and engineering within a decade. It will deliver decisive breakthroughs to secure American energy dominance, accelerate scientific discovery, and strengthen national security. “Throughout history, from the Manhattan Project to the Apollo mission, our nation’s brightest minds and industries have answered the call when their nation needed them,” said U.S. Secretary of Energy Chris Wright. “Today, the United States is calling on them once again. Under President Trump’s leadership, the Genesis Mission will unleash the full power of our National Laboratories, supercomputers, and data resources to ensure that America is the global leader in artificial intelligence and to usher in a new golden era of American discovery.” The announcement builds on President Trump’s Executive Order Removing Barriers to American Leadership In Artificial Intelligence and advances his America’s AI Action Plan released earlier this year—a directive to remove barriers to innovation, reduce dependence on foreign adversaries, and unleash the full strength of America’s scientific enterprise. Secretary Wright has designated Under Secretary for Science Darío Gil to lead the initiative. The Genesis Mission will mobilize the Department of Energy’s 17 National Laboratories, industry, and academia to build an integrated discovery platform. The platform will connect the world’s best supercomputers, AI systems, and next-generation quantum systems with the most advanced scientific instruments in the nation. Once complete, the platform will be the world’s most complex and powerful scientific instrument ever built. It will draw on the expertise of roughly 40,000 DOE scientists, engineers, and technical staff, alongside private sector innovators, to ensure that the United States leads and builds the technologies that will define the future. The Genesis Mission will focus on addressing three key challenges of national importance: American energy dominance: The Genesis Mission will accelerate advanced nuclear, fusion, and grid modernization using AI to provide affordable, reliable, and secure energy for Americans. Advancing discovery science: Through DOE’s investment and collaboration with industry, America is building the quantum ecosystem that will power discoveries—and industries—for decades to come. Ensuring national security: DOE will create advanced AI technologies for national security missions, deploy systems to ensure the safety and reliability of the U.S. nuclear stockpile, and accelerate the development of defense-ready materials. Under Secretary for Science and Genesis Mission Director, Dr. Darío Gil: “The Genesis Mission marks a defining moment for the next era of American science. We are linking the nation’s most advanced facilities, data, and computing into one closed-loop system to create a scientific instrument for the ages, an engine for discovery that doubles R&D productivity and solves challenges once thought impossible.” Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration, Brandon Williams: “The Genesis Mission represents the next great chapter and an unparalleled opportunity for America’s scientific and national security leadership. Building on decades of innovation and collaboration across our national laboratories, NNSA will leverage AI, quantum computing, and advanced data analytics that will strengthen our deterrents and ensure the United States maintains an unmatched strategic edge over our adversaries. Under President Trump’s leadership, this mission will embody the very best of American ingenuity, turning science and innovation into security.” Chair of the National Laboratory Directors’ Council, Dr. John Wagner: “DOE’s National Laboratories are engines of discovery that keep the United States competitive and secure. The Genesis Mission unlocks the full potential of these institutions by giving our scientists and engineers tools to work at the speed of innovation. Our laboratories have always risen to meet the nation’s greatest challenges, and this initiative ensures we continue that legacy in the age of artificial intelligence.” Recommended reading View all news DOE selects Fermilab-led AI initiative to advance particle accelerator performance August 20, 2026 accelerator AI SRF cavities Fermilab feature In a project selected for funding by the Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory and partners from other national laboratories, universities and industry will apply artificial intelligence and machine learning to enable precise and adaptive resonance control in particle accelerators. Their work aims to lower operating costs by millions of dollars each year and improve accelerator performance, driving scientific discovery. DUNE uses AI to transform the future of neutrino research August 6, 2026 AI DUNE neutrino Fermilab feature DUNE is pioneering the future of neutrino research by integrating artificial intelligence into its experiment, drawing on decades of machine learning work at Fermilab. U.S. Department of Energy invests in Fermilab projects to accelerate AI-enabled scientific discovery July 22, 2026 AI Genesis Mission Press release The awards will support Fermilab projects by leveraging AI to boost innovation and technology development, advance DOE’s Genesis Mission and accelerate scientific discovery. We bring the world together to solve the mysteries of matter, energy, space and time. Subscribe to our newsletters About Community Newsroom Contact Resources For Employees For Industry Jobs Science DUNE at LBNF Particle Physics Particle Accelerators Detectors, Computing, Quantum Particle Physics 101 Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory Managed by Fermi Forward Discovery Group, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science Security, Privacy, Legal | Use of Cookies 