 Groq Partners with U.S. Department of Energy to Advance AI Inference and Next-Generation Computing Infrastructure | Groq is the premier neocloud for fast inference Platform Company Blog Contact Start building Platform Company Blog Contact Start building Groq Closes $350 million Series A, Building the World's Leading AI Inference Cloud Read more > Partnership December 18, 2025 Groq Partners with U.S. Department of Energy to Advance AI Inference and Next-Generation Computing Infrastructure Mountain View, Calif. – December 18, 2025 – Groq , the leader in AI inference, and the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) to facilitate potential collaboration in areas of mutual interest regarding artificial intelligence (AI) and advanced computing initiatives through the DOE’s Genesis Mission. This bold initiative reflects the shared interest in fostering American-led technological innovation, accelerating the deployment of next-generation AI capabilities, and strengthening domestic capacity in key areas such as compute infrastructure, data architecture, and responsible AI development. Importantly, the MOU establishes a framework for information sharing and cooperative exploration between Groq and DOE in support of these shared goals. Ian Andrews, Groq’s Chief Revenue Officer, today attended the Genesis Mission event, which was held at the White House, and offered an opportunity for industry leaders and Administration officials to discuss the upcoming program and its implications. “There isn't enough compute for AI to benefit everyone. We're partnering with the White House and the Department of Energy to change that,” said Jonathan Ross, CEO and Founder of Groq. Under the MOU, Groq and DOE will explore opportunities to: Advance low-latency AI inference for scientific discovery, including new approaches and agent-driven workflows that enable closed-loop experimentation and faster insights for Department of Energy mission users, Explore energy-efficient AI inference and resilient domestic supply chains, with a focus on evaluating LPU-based architectures that improve power efficiency, sustainability, and U.S. leadership in critical AI chip technologies, Collaborate on benchmarks, best practices, and standards for deterministic and energy-efficient AI inference, including methods to assess reproducibility, latency, throughput, and power performance across scientific workflows, and Align on operational and mission-relevant applications in support of the Genesis Mission. The Genesis Mission further solidifies the Trump Administration’s commitment to sustaining U.S. leadership in artificial intelligence and serves as a critical mechanism for defining, scaling, and ultimately exporting the American AI stack to global partners. In July, Groq applauded the efforts of the AI Action Plan and continues to support the mission of strengthening U.S. leadership while enabling the responsible deployment of American AI infrastructure worldwide. About Groq Groq builds and operates the inference infrastructure that powers real-time AI with the speed and cost it requires. Founded in 2016, Groq created the LPU and GroqCloud to run advanced models faster and more affordably. Groq designs its own hardware, owns the full software stack, and operates the inference platform that serves more than 2.8 million developers and leading Fortune 500 enterprises worldwide. Groq is a core part of the American AI Stack and works with partners globally to deploy and operate large-scale inference clusters. Media Contact pr-media@groq.com premier neocloud for fast inference Terms and policies Platform Company Blog Contact Start building 