 Associate lab directors help shape future of Fermilab Home About Jobs Contact Phone book Science Particle Physics Particle Accelerators Detectors, Computing, Quantum Particle Physics 101 DUNE at LBNF Newsroom News and features Press releases Fermilab in the news Fact sheets Media contacts Subscribe to our public newsletter Social media Community Hours and public access Tours, programs and events Calendar of public events Education programs Lederman Science Center Subscribe to our public newsletter Resources Employees Researchers Job seekers Public Neighbors Industry Business Visitors Students and teachers Media Search Home About Jobs Contact Phone book Search Science Particle Physics Particle Accelerators Detectors, Computing, Quantum Particle Physics 101 DUNE at LBNF Newsroom News and features Press releases Fermilab in the news Fact sheets Media contacts Subscribe to our public newsletter Social media Community Hours and public access Tours, programs and events Calendar of public events Education programs Lederman Science Center Subscribe to our public newsletter Resources Employees Researchers Job seekers Public Neighbors Industry Business Visitors Students and teachers Media Facebook X (Twitter) Instagram YouTube LinkedIn Fermilab feature Associate lab directors help shape future of Fermilab August 25, 2026 | By: Michael Nartker Tags: accelerator complex DUNE LBNF particle physics technology Newsroom News and features Press releases Fermilab in the news Fact sheets Contact us Site search Menu Newsroom News and features Press releases Fermilab in the news Fact sheets Contact us Site search Fermilab’s recent reorganization brings its accelerator, physics and technology programs under three unified directorates, each charged with advancing the laboratory’s most important scientific priorities. Together, these directorates form a coordinated leadership structure designed to deliver world class research and guide Fermilab’s future. Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory’s reputation as America’s particle physics laboratory is based on groundbreaking experiments, powerful particle accelerators and advanced technologies, all pushing the boundaries of discovery. Helping to guide those efforts and chart the path for Fermilab’s future is the lab’s scientific leadership team. Earlier this year, Fermilab underwent a reorganization that established three science-focused directorates — the Accelerator Directorate, the Physics Directorate and the Technology Directorate led, respectively, by Associate Laboratory Directors Alexander Valishev, Doug Glenzinski and Anna Grassellino. Fermilab’s associate laboratory directors are, left to right, Anna Grassellino, Doug Glenzinski and Alexander Valishev. Credit: Ryan Postel, Fermilab Together, the three organizations oversee the laboratory’s accelerator complex, scientific research programs and technology development that are core to Fermilab achieving its top priorities. This collaborative approach reflects Fermilab’s broader vision of delivering world-leading science through disciplined execution — safely, efficiently and in partnership with the global scientific community. “The three mission directorates are united to achieve Fermilab’s highest priority, which is the delivery of beam to the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment at the Long-Baseline Neutrino Facility by 2031,” Valishev said. “Each has a significant, well-defined area of responsibility in this common goal. The Accelerator Directorate is focused on the delivery of primary proton beam to the LBNF target. The Physics Directorate is working on particle detectors. The Technology Directorate is tasked with producing state-of-the-art accelerator and detector components. Collaboration is key to achieving the top priority, and we share knowledge and resources amongst ourselves and within the lab broadly.” Three directorates, one team Valishev, who holds a doctorate in physics from the Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics in Russia, has been with Fermilab for more than two decades. He began his career at Fermilab as a guest scientist in 2003 and has held a series of increasing leadership roles in the laboratory’s accelerator organization. As head of the Accelerator Directorate, Valishev leads a team responsible for operating and enhancing the Fermilab Accelerator Complex. They deliver particle beams for researchers while maintaining and modernizing one of the world’s most sophisticated accelerator facilities. His long-term vision is an accelerator complex capable of reliably delivering megawatt-class proton beams for DUNE — protons that will be converted into neutrinos at the end of the beamline — while expanding its capabilities to support future particle physics, accelerator science and emerging applications such as fusion research. “Our core responsibility is delivering particle beams for researchers. But we also have to continue innovating so the accelerator complex can support the science of tomorrow.” Alexander Valishev, Fermilab Accelerator Directorate “Our core responsibility is delivering particle beams for researchers,” Valishev said. “But we also have to continue innovating so the accelerator complex can support the science of tomorrow.” Glenzinski leads the Physics Directorate, home to Fermilab’s particle physics research. The directorate oversees experimental programs spanning the cosmic, energy and neutrino frontiers. Holding a doctorate in physics from Johns Hopkins University, he began his career at Fermilab as a Wilson Fellow in 1999. Since then, Glenzinski has held an array of leadership roles at Fermilab, including deputy chief research officer, chief project officer and co-spokesperson for the Mu2e experiment, which is designed to probe for new physics through observing muons converting directly into electrons with no accompanying neutrinos. “I see the mission of the Physics Directorate as conceiving, designing, building and operating experimental facilities to accomplish world-class science together with our collaborators and international partners,” Glenzinski said. “It’s everything from conceptualizing new experiments to choosing the experiments that are the most promising and executing them.” “I see the mission of the Physics Directorate as conceiving, designing, building and operating experimental facilities to accomplish world-class science together with our collaborators and international partners.” Doug Glenzinski, Fermilab Physics Directorate Glenzinski’s directorate is also home to Fermilab’s theory division. “We have a world-class theory group that plays an important role in understanding the underlying science and tying together the broader physics community around the new ideas that inspire future experiments,” he said. Grassellino, who also holds the positions at Fermilab of chief technology officer and director of the Superconducting Quantum Materials and Systems Center, heads the Technology Directorate. This directorate is central to Fermilab’s priority of advancing technology and innovation for the benefit of science and society. Grassellino has been with Fermilab since 2014 and has served in various leadership and management roles for projects and programs at the lab and currently serves on the DOE Office of Science Advisory Committee, chairing its quantum subcommittee. She holds a doctorate in physics from the University of Pennsylvania. “The Technology Directorate is about pushing the boundaries of what is technologically possible so that we can push the boundaries of science.” Anna Grassellino, Fermilab Technology Directorate Grassellino’s directorate brings together Fermilab’s expertise in superconducting technologies, cryogenics, quantum information science, artificial intelligence, material science, microelectronics, fabrication , and SRF and magnet accelerator technologies. This consolidation has unified Fermilab’s technology portfolio under a single strategic vision and positions the laboratory for leadership in DOE priorities, including the department’s flagship AI initiative, the Genesis Mission. “The Technology Directorate is about pushing the boundaries of what is technologically possible so that we can push the boundaries of science,” Grassellino said. “Many of the discoveries we aspire to make require capabilities that simply do not exist yet. Our role is to invent them and advance them beyond today’s state of the art. In that sense, technology is not only an enabler of the scientific frontier; it is a scientific frontier in its own right. And when we push those boundaries, we create new possibilities for discovery at Fermilab and new capabilities that can benefit science and society far beyond particle physics.” Creating momentum With the new leadership structure in place, each associate laboratory director has established clear goals to achieve by the end of this year. For Valishev, those priorities include successfully completing accelerator maintenance, restoring full Main Injector operations, preparing for future high-power beam delivery, completing long-term accelerator readiness planning for DUNE and continuing organizational improvements that strengthen execution. Glenzinski is focused on advancing major projects — including Fermilab’s contributions to upgrades for the High-Luminosity Large Hadron Collider at CERN, constructing the Mu2e experiment and continuing to host experiments across a broad science portfolio. At the same time the directorate is improving communication and operational efficiency across the physics program. Fermilab’s associate laboratory directors work closely with Patricia McBride, second from left, who is the lab’s deputy director for science and chief research officer. Credit: Ryan Postel, Fermilab Grassellino’s priorities center on delivering technologies essential to Fermilab’s flagship projects while demonstrating how AI and quantum can transform scientific discovery. In her role of chief technology officer, Grassellino is overseeing the laboratory-wide AI initiatives spanning neutrino science, particle physics, quantum science, and operations, while also expanding technology transfer and commercialization efforts to move laboratory technologies into broader scientific, industrial and commercial applications. Rather than pursuing dozens of initiatives simultaneously, Grassellino wants the directorate to demonstrate measurable progress on a focused set of ambitious goals and science questions. “I would like us to set clear goals and achieve them,” she said. “If we can execute exceptionally well on a few transformative objectives, we’ll create momentum for everything that follows.” Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory is America’s national laboratory for particle physics and accelerator research. Fermi Forward Discovery Group manages Fermilab for the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science. Visit Fermilab’s website at www.fnal.gov and follow us on social media. Recommended reading View all news URA honors Fermilab researchers advancing laboratory’s top priorities August 25, 2026 CMS DUNE LBNF Muon g-2 SQMS URA Fermilab feature Tyler Barrett, Charis-Kleio Koraka, Kevin Kelly and Silvia Zorzetti are the recipients of the 2026 URA Honorary Awards. The awards are presented each year by Universities Research Association to recognize significant contributions to research at Fermilab. Scientists travel to Fermilab to discuss future of high-energy physics August 13, 2026 American Physical Society CERN DUNE HL-LHC Accelerator Upgrade Project LBNF Fermilab feature Fermilab recently hosted over 500 physicists for the American Physical Society’s biennial Division of Particles and Fields meeting. With presentations by Fermilab Director Norbert Holtkamp and CERN Director-General Mark Thomson, the meeting provided particle physicists the opportunity to come together and consider the future of high-energy physics research. DUNE uses AI to transform the future of neutrino research August 6, 2026 AI DUNE neutrino Fermilab feature DUNE is pioneering the future of neutrino research by integrating artificial intelligence into its experiment, drawing on decades of machine learning work at Fermilab. We bring the world together to solve the mysteries of matter, energy, space and time. Subscribe to our newsletters About Community Newsroom Contact Resources For Employees For Industry Jobs Science DUNE at LBNF Particle Physics Particle Accelerators Detectors, Computing, Quantum Particle Physics 101 Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory Managed by Fermi Forward Discovery Group, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science Security, Privacy, Legal | Use of Cookies 