 Big Ideas Lab explores how the Genesis Mission aims to accelerate scientific discovery | Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Our Purpose Our Science and Technology Join Our Team Partner with Us News Community and Education About Primary Menu Our Purpose Management and Sponsors Our History Our History - 1950s Our History - 1960s Our History - 1970s Our History - 1980s Our History - 1990s Our History - 2000s Our History - 2010s Our History - 2020s Our Science and Technology Advanced Materials and Manufacturing Bioscience & Bioengineering Earth and Atmospheric Science Facilities and Centers High-Energy-Density Science HPC, Simulation and Data Science Lasers and Optical Science and Technology Nuclear, Chemical and Isotopic Science and Technology Join Our Team Careers Find Your Job Career Areas Students Postdocs Events & Resources LCA Notifications Affiliate Opportunities Accessibility Culture Lab Life Military & Veterans Benefits Partner With Us Office of Government and External Affairs News Media Contacts Media Library Publications Lab Report Fact Sheets Social Media Community and Education Discovery Center Community Giving Science Education Environment, Safety, and Health Employee and Retirement Resources Want Ads In Memoriam Tours About LLNL Our Leadership Our Impact By the Numbers Our Organizations Operations and Business Protocol and Special Events Visiting Directions Contact Search Search Search Search Mobile Menu Site Menu Our Purpose Our Science and Technology Join Our Team Partner With Us News Community and Education About LLNL LLNL Menu Missions Research Doing Business News About Careers Community Our Science and Technology Advanced Materials and Manufacturing Bioscience and Bioengineering Earth and Atmospheric Science Facilities, Centers and Institutes High-Energy-Density Science HPC, Simulation and Data Science Lasers & Optical Science and Technology Nuclear, Chemical & Isotopic Science and Technology Learn How We Make Science and Technology Happen We support diverse research activities with talented staff, state-of-the-art facilities and core competencies. From internal collaboration to external partnerships, we work together to advance scientific discovery. Learn More About Our Science and Technology News Podcasts Highlights Media Contacts Media Library Publications Lab Report Fact Sheets Social Media Applying AI to National Security Artificial intelligence is revolutionizing science and technology. Learn how LLNL is applying advanced AI models and methods alongside experimental data and physics-based modeling to accelerate discovery, improve predictive understanding and strengthen mission execution. Learn More About AI at LLNL Our Science and Technology Advanced Materials and Manufacturing Bioscience and Bioengineering Earth and Atmospheric Science Facilities, Centers and Institutes High-Energy-Density Science HPC, Simulation and Data Science Lasers & Optical Science and Technology Nuclear, Chemical & Isotopic Science and Technology Learn How We Make Science and Technology Happen We support diverse research activities with talented staff, state-of-the-art facilities and core competencies. From internal collaboration to external partnerships, we work together to advance scientific discovery. Learn More About Our Science and Technology News Podcasts Highlights Media Contacts Media Library Publications Lab Report Fact Sheets Social Media Applying AI to National Security Artificial intelligence is revolutionizing science and technology. Learn how LLNL is applying advanced AI models and methods alongside experimental data and physics-based modeling to accelerate discovery, improve predictive understanding and strengthen mission execution. Learn More About AI at LLNL Back Big Ideas Lab explores how the Genesis Mission aims to accelerate scientific discovery (Download Image) Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Scientific discovery has always moved through a familiar cycle: question, hypothesis, experiment and a result. In the latest episode of the Big Ideas Lab podcast, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) explores how the Department of Energy’s (DOE) Genesis Mission aims to accelerate that process by uniting AI, high-performance computing (HPC), experiments and the infrastructure of the DOE national laboratories. Listen on Apple or Spotify . The episode examines the growing gap between the pace of scientific advancement and the scale of the challenges facing the nation, from energy and advanced manufacturing to national security and next-generation supercomputing. “The timing is right,” said Darío Gil, DOE undersecretary for science and director of the Genesis Mission. “If we had tried to do Genesis 10 or 15 years ago, we couldn’t have succeeded. But the moment is now.” Genesis is a coordinated national effort involving all 17 DOE national laboratories, alongside universities, industry and federal partners. At its core, the mission is about helping the U.S. move faster on the problems that matter most in a connected workflow, where each result helps refine the next question. “We seek to double the productivity and impact of America’s R&D engine in a decade,” Gil said. The episode also explores why the DOE national laboratories are uniquely positioned to support that effort. Their role is not only rooted in scientific facilities and computing power, but in the ability to assemble interdisciplinary teams, operate complex national-scale systems and apply scientific rigor to mission-driven problems over long periods of time. For LLNL and the National Nuclear Security Administration enterprise, Genesis represents a new way of integrating AI into science and national security, where speed matters but trust, accuracy and human oversight remain essential. “It’s a new way of doing science,” said Rob Neely, LLNL associate director for Weapons Simulation and Computing. “It’s not going to necessarily replace the way that we’ve done science, but it’s a new way of thinking about the processes and how to come up with new innovations.” The episode highlights how that approach began to take shape during the COVID-19 pandemic, when researchers used AI and simulation to help accelerate the development and testing of potential antibody responses. For Neely, the work offered a glimpse of how AI, simulation, experimentation and validation could continuously inform one another to speed scientific progress. But the goal for the Genesis Mission is not simply deploying AI faster, according to Gil. It is about building an entirely new engine that scientists can trust. “We are science first, and not AI first,” Gil said. The episode also examines the operational and ethical challenges involved in integrating AI into large-scale scientific environments, including data governance, workforce training, security and infrastructure development. “There’s tremendous opportunity and there’s some tremendous risk,” said Lori Diachin, principal deputy for Computing at LLNL. Diachin discusses the need to ensure AI systems remain reliable, explainable and aligned with institutional safeguards as the technology rapidly evolves. “You can’t necessarily trust what’s coming out of an AI model,” Diachin said. “Ultimately, the buck has to stop with the human.” Finally, the episode explores the role LLNL is playing in building pieces of the infrastructure needed for Genesis, from HPC, shared platforms and secure networking to workforce development and data governance. That includes preparing employees to work effectively with AI tools while ensuring data is findable, accessible to the right people and protected from the wrong ones. As the episode highlights, the Genesis Mission is more than just another AI platform. It is a coordinated effort to rethink how scientific discovery happens at national scale and whether the U.S. can speed up innovation in science, energy, manufacturing and national security. “Genesis is going to be a great accelerant of the United States’ ability to do big science faster,” Neely said. Listen to the latest episode of Big Ideas Lab o n Apple or Spotify to learn how the Genesis Mission could change the way the nation approaches its most complex scientific challenges. May 19, 2026 Contact Jeremy Thomas [email protected] (925) 422-5539 Tags Advanced Materials and Manufacturing HPC, Simulation, and Data Science Defense Energy Nuclear deterrence Computing Academic Engagement Government Industry Collaborations Featured Articles LLNL supports successful demonstration of a new space inspection capability Teacher Research Academy connects educators to LLNL science Big Ideas Lab podcast takes on the science of scale-up LLNL.GOV Our Purpose Our Science and Technology Join Our Team Partner with Us News Community and Education About LLNL ORGANIZATIONS Computing Engineering Global Security National Ignition Facility and Photon Science Operations and Business Physical and Life Sciences Strategic Deterrence RESOURCES Contact Visiting Emergency Communication Research Ethics Disclaimer Copyright and Reuse Sitemap STAY CONNECTED STAY CONNECTED LLNL.GOV Our Purpose Our Science and Technology Join Our Team Partner with Us News Community and Education About LLNL ORGANIZATIONS Computing Engineering Global Security National Ignition Facility and Photon Science Operations and Business Physical and Life Sciences Strategic Deterrence RESOURCES Contact Visiting Emergency Communication Research Ethics Disclaimer Copyright and Reuse Sitemap STAY CONNECTED Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory | 7000 East Avenue • Livermore, CA 94550 | LLNL-WEB-458451 Operated by the Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC for the Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration Learn about the Department of Energy's Vulnerability Disclosure Program Home Disclaimer Privacy Notice Our Purpose Management and Sponsors Our History Our History - 1950s Our History - 1960s Our History - 1970s Our History - 1980s Our History - 1990s Our History - 2000s Our History - 2010s Our History - 2020s Our Science and Technology Advanced Materials and Manufacturing Bioscience & Bioengineering Earth and Atmospheric Science Facilities and Centers High-Energy-Density Science HPC, Simulation and Data Science Lasers and Optical Science and Technology Nuclear, Chemical and Isotopic Science and Technology Join Our Team Careers Find Your Job Career Areas Students Postdocs Events & Resources LCA Notifications Affiliate Opportunities Accessibility Culture Lab Life Military & Veterans Benefits Partner With Us Office of Government and External Affairs News Media Contacts Media Library Publications Lab Report Fact Sheets Social Media Community and Education Discovery Center Community Giving Science Education Environment, Safety, and Health Employee and Retirement Resources Want Ads In Memoriam Tours About LLNL Our Leadership Our Impact By the Numbers Our Organizations Operations and Business Protocol and Special Events Visiting Directions Contact 