 Genesis Mission funding awarded to seven Los Alamos projects | LANL DOE/LANL Jurisdiction Fire Danger Rating: Skip To Content LANL Home media news July 22, 2026 Department of Energy Genesis Mission funding awarded to seven Los Alamos projects The projects will advance fusion, nuclear energy, national security and science capabilities Los Alamos National Laboratory will lead seven projects for the Department of Energy’s historic Genesis Mission. Seven Los Alamos National Laboratory projects have been selected for funding under the Genesis Mission , a national initiative led by the U.S. Department of Energy, which is building the world’s most powerful integrated science discovery platform. “Los Alamos has a long history of advancing the scientific capabilities that strengthen our nation, and these projects continue that tradition,” said Laboratory Director Thom Mason. “Selection for the Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission reflects the exceptional talent of our researchers and the Laboratory’s leadership in high-performance computing, artificial intelligence and scientific discovery. These investments will accelerate breakthroughs that advance national security, energy security and U.S. scientific competitiveness.” About the Projects The Laboratory has been selected as the lead on the following projects : An Autonomous AI Framework for Closed-Loop Nuclear Fuel Qualification Reinforcement Learning for Scientific Problem-to-Code Generation via Measurement-Based Reward Functions A Physics-Informed Multimodal Foundation Model for Fracture Evolution in the Upper Crust AI-Guided Creep-Fatigue Life Prediction for Fusion Structural Materials AI-Enabled Decision-Support Platform for Stimulation Design, Fracture Characterization, and Production Optimization Toward Doubling Subsurface Energy Recovery ArchEvolve --An Evolutionary Agentic AI System for Deep Co-Design From improved Coupled Ocean-Ice States to Improved Water Prediction: A Generative AI Approach Additionally, Los Alamos will play a role in 19 other projects, where partner institutions are the lead. The goal of the Phase I Request for Application awards is to identify promising pathways toward transformative scientific capabilities and establish a foundation for future investment and scale. Project teams will design and demonstrate research workflows that integrate AI with scientific investigation, while rigorously evaluating whether those approaches can accelerate discovery, improve predictive capabilities, enhance experimentation, or generate new scientific insights. Los Alamos National Laboratory will be recognized at the Genesis Mission Summit today, where awardees will be announced. About the Genesis Mission The Genesis Mission is a historic national initiative led by the U.S. Department of Energy, which is building the world’s most powerful integrated science discovery platform. By uniting government, industry, academia, and philanthropy, it is accelerating breakthroughs in energy, scientific discovery, and national security through a new platform that combines AI, supercomputing, quantum systems, and advanced scientific instruments. LA-UR-26-25699 Contact Media Relations | media_relations@lanl.gov Related Topics Artificial Intelligence | Computing | Science, Technology & Engineering Share Explore More Topics About the Lab Artificial Intelligence Awards and Recognitions Community Computing Energy History Operations Science, Technology & Engineering Space Weapons More Stories All News Codesign results in powerful technology for Mission and Vision supercomputers Los Alamos-partnered processor technology underpins CPUs that will power agentic AI workloads Los Alamos forms quantum computing-focused research center Facility unites Laboratory’s quantum computing efforts under one roof Quantum computers tackle a century‑old math puzzle A Los Alamos scientist has shown that quantum algorithms can be used to factor group representations — a problem central to particle physics and many other fields — that was thought to be infeasible for computers at any practical scale Los Alamos National Laboratory launches frontier AI models on the Venado supercomputer The Venado supercomputer is now running the latest OpenAI reasoning models on its NVIDIA Grace Hopper GPUs to accelerate national security-related science Los Alamos team finds a new path toward quantum machine learning Gaussian had until now escaped use in the quantum computing realm Understanding quantum computing's most troubling problem In new paper, Los Alamos scientists collect and review years of work on barren plateaus, a mathematical dead end that has plagued variational quantum computing Previous 1 2 Next Subscribe to our Newsletter Sign up to receive the latest news and feature stories from Los Alamos National Laboratory SIGN UP Los Alamos National Laboratory P.O. Box 1663 Los Alamos, NM 87545 (505) 667-5061 At The Lab Business Opportunities Jobs Organizations Research Library User Facilities Information Emergency Ombuds Reading Room Resources Science Museum For Employees AskIT LANLInside MyMail Training Terms of Use/Privacy Managed by Triad National Security, LLC for the U.S. Dept. of Energy’s NNSA Copyright 2026 Triad National Security, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Learn about the Department of Energy’s Vulnerability Disclosure Program 