 Launch of Genesis Mission announced by Energy Department | LANL DOE/LANL Jurisdiction Fire Danger Rating: Skip To Content LANL Home media news November 24, 2025 Energy Department Launches ‘Genesis Mission’ to Transform American Science and Innovation Through the AI Computing Revolution President Trump today issued an Executive Order to launch the Genesis Mission, a historic national effort led by the Department of Energy. Los Alamos National Laboratory supports the Genesis Mission, the Department of Energy’s newly-launched national initiative to advance artificial intelligence and accelerate scientific achievements. From stewarding our nation’s deterrence capabilities with high performance computing for modeling and simulation to driving breakthroughs in quantum science to partnering with top AI innovators, Los Alamos has helped redefine what’s possible for the nation. Across domains, the Laboratory will leverage its broad and deep expertise and use the Genesis Mission platform to strengthen the nation’s security, infrastructure and scientific dominance. “The Laboratory has the workforce, computing capabilities and unique data to support DOE’s Genesis Mission,” said Laboratory Director Thom Mason. “We will continue to use our AI computing resources and long standing industry partnerships to strengthen our country's national security, energy, and science capabilities.” WASHINGTON — President Trump today issued an Executive Order to launch the Genesis Mission, a historic national effort led by the Department of Energy. The Genesis Mission will transform American science and innovation through the power of artificial intelligence (AI), strengthening the nation’s technological leadership and global competitiveness. The ambitious mission will harness the current AI and advanced computing revolution to double the productivity and impact of American science and engineering within a decade. It will deliver decisive breakthroughs to secure American energy dominance, accelerate scientific discovery, and strengthen national security. “Throughout history, from the Manhattan Project to the Apollo mission, our nation’s brightest minds and industries have answered the call when their nation needed them,” said U.S. Secretary of Energy Chris Wright. “Today, the United States is calling on them once again. Under President Trump’s leadership, the Genesis Mission will unleash the full power of our National Laboratories, supercomputers, and data resources to ensure that America is the global leader in artificial intelligence and to usher in a new golden era of American discovery.” The announcement builds on President Trump’s Executive Order Removing Barriers to American Leadership In Artificial Intelligence and advances his America’s AI Action Plan released earlier this year—a directive to remove barriers to innovation, reduce dependence on foreign adversaries, and unleash the full strength of America’s scientific enterprise. Secretary Wright has designated Under Secretary for Science Darío Gil to lead the initiative. The Genesis Mission will mobilize the Department of Energy’s 17 National Laboratories, industry, and academia to build an integrated discovery platform. The platform will connect the world’s best supercomputers, AI systems, and next-generation quantum systems with the most advanced scientific instruments in the nation. Once complete, the platform will be the world’s most complex and powerful scientific instrument ever built. It will draw on the expertise of roughly 40,000 DOE scientists, engineers, and technical staff, alongside private sector innovators, to ensure that the United States leads and builds the technologies that will define the future. The Genesis Mission will focus on addressing three key challenges of national importance: American energy dominance: The Genesis Mission will accelerate advanced nuclear, fusion, and grid modernization using AI to provide affordable, reliable, and secure energy for Americans. Advancing discovery science: Through DOE’s investment and collaboration with industry, America is building the quantum ecosystem that will power discoveries—and industries—for decades to come. Ensuring national security: DOE will create advanced AI technologies for national security missions, deploy systems to ensure the safety and reliability of the U.S. nuclear stockpile, and accelerate the development of defense-ready materials. Additional quotes for media: Under Secretary for Science and Genesis Mission Director, Dr. Darío Gil: “The Genesis Mission marks a defining moment for the next era of American science. We are linking the nation’s most advanced facilities, data, and computing into one closed-loop system to create a scientific instrument for the ages, an engine for discovery that doubles R&D productivity and solves challenges once thought impossible.” Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration, Brandon Williams: “The Genesis Mission represents the next great chapter and an unparallelled opportunity for America’s scientific and national security leadership. “Building on decades of innovation and collaboration across our national laboratories, NNSA will leverage AI, quantum computing, and advanced data analytics that will strengthen our deterrents and ensure the United States maintains an unmatched strategic edge over our adversaries. Under President Trump’s leadership, this mission will embody the very best of American ingenuity, turning science and innovation into security.” Chair of the National Laboratory Directors’ Council, Dr. John Wagner: “DOE’s National Laboratories are engines of discovery that keep the United States competitive and secure. The Genesis Mission unlocks the full potential of these institutions by giving our scientists and engineers tools to work at the speed of innovation. Our laboratories have always risen to meet the nation’s greatest challenges, and this initiative ensures we continue that legacy in the age of artificial intelligence.” Related Topics Artificial Intelligence Share Explore More Topics About the Lab Artificial Intelligence Awards and Recognitions Community Computing Energy History Operations Science, Technology & Engineering Space Weapons More Stories All News UC 'AI Science at Scale' summit showcases landmark innovations Senior national lab leadership — including DDSTE Pat Fitch — were present Los Alamos scientists team up to advance the Lab’s AI mission Dozens of project members collaborated in a winter hackathon New diffusion modeling approach developed for scientific workflow applications Discrete spatial diffusion models data while obeying scientific principles New approach detects adversarial attacks in multimodal AI systems Topological signatures key to revealing attacks, identifying origins of threats Los Alamos contributes to unprecedented dataset to train AI models Meta leads molecular simulations dataset effort using Lab software and tools Laboratory researchers converge to test and train scientific AI models 1000 Scientist AI Jam Session brings scientists together with leading-edge AI tools Previous 1 2 Next Subscribe to our Newsletter Sign up to receive the latest news and feature stories from Los Alamos National Laboratory SIGN UP Los Alamos National Laboratory P.O. Box 1663 Los Alamos, NM 87545 (505) 667-5061 At The Lab Business Opportunities Jobs Organizations Research Library User Facilities Information Emergency Ombuds Reading Room Resources Science Museum For Employees AskIT LANLInside MyMail Training Terms of Use/Privacy Managed by Triad National Security, LLC for the U.S. Dept. of Energy’s NNSA Copyright 2026 Triad National Security, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Learn about the Department of Energy’s Vulnerability Disclosure Program 