 Genesis Mission | Computational Science | NLR Skip to main content Search Site by keywords Search Site by keywords Menu Close Computational Science Research Research Applied Mathematics Artificial Intelligence Computational Applications Data, Analysis, & Visualization Energy-Efficient Advanced Computing System Operations Staff Impacts Publications Data & Tools Facilities Facilities High-Performance Computing User Facility High-Performance Computing Data Center Insight Center Computational Science Genesis Mission Applied Mathematics Artificial Intelligence Genesis Mission Machine Learning Reinforcement Learning Security of Artificial Intelligence Computational Applications Data, Analysis, & Visualization Energy-Efficient Advanced Computing System Operations Genesis Mission NLR supports Genesis Mission, a historic national initiative to accelerate scientific discovery, strengthen national security, and drive energy innovation through artificial intelligence (AI) and advanced computing. Led by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Genesis Mission brings together 17 national laboratories and partners across government, industry, academia, and philanthropy to accelerate AI-enabled scientific discovery. Genesis Mission Platform At the heart of the initiative is an integrated platform that unifies national laboratory AI systems, supercomputing resources, quantum technologies, experimental facilities, and unique datasets across major scientific domains—accelerating the pace, scale, and impact of research and innovation. NLR is an infrastructure partner with the American Science Cloud, a secure, federated, science-optimized cloud environment that serves as the foundation of the Genesis Mission platform. American Science Cloud enables researchers to develop AI-ready datasets, train advanced AI models, conduct distributed simulations, control scientific instruments, and securely share data across the national laboratory system. Through its expertise in AI, advanced computing, and scientific research, NLR helps strengthen this ecosystem, which enables Genesis Mission research teams—including Phase 1 award recipients—to develop, evaluate, and enhance AI-enabled scientific workflows. Phase I Proposal Awards Announced in July 2026, Genesis Mission's Phase I proposal awards aim to identify promising approaches for developing next-generation scientific capabilities and informing future investment. Awarded project teams will design and demonstrate AI-enabled research workflows while evaluating their potential to accelerate scientific discovery, improve predictive capabilities, enhance experimentation, and generate new scientific insights. NLR received 12 Phase I proposal awards and serves as the lead institution on four projects, highlighting the laboratory’s leadership in advancing AI-enabled scientific research across multiple disciplines. NLR is leading these funded projects: AI-Enabled Flow-Induced Vibration Modeling in partnership with the California Institute of Technology Autonomous Identification of Semiconductor Charge Transport Physics in partnership with Lila Sciences Turbulence-Microphysics-Land Nexus: Unlocking Predictive Power for the Coupled Water Cycle Using Weather Foundation Models in partnership with DOE's Atmospheric Radiation Measurement User Facility Agentic AI-Driven Synthesis of Fuel Cell Catalysts Though Low-Temperature, Controlled Graphitization and Iron Incorporation in partnership with the American Science Cloud and the Transformational AI Models Consortium. NLR is supporting these funded projects: AI-Advantage for Defect-Property Prediction in Non-Von Neumann Computing Materials (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory) A Foundational Generative AI Framework To Advance Water-Energy Security (Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory) Agentic GeoAI for Precision Mineral Exploration (Colorado School of Mines) AI-Enabled Multiscale Discovery of Genotype-To-Phenotype Control Points for Lodging-Resistant Bioenergy Sorghum (Iowa State University of Science and Technology) Sensor-Enabled AI Digital Twin for Autonomous Biomanufacturing: Real-Time Control and Predictive Scale-Up via Inline FEW-IR Spectroscopy (University of Central Florida Board of Trustees) AlphaFilm—Closed-Loop AI for Thin-Film Materials (Exabyte Inc.) From Edisonian Optimization to Predictive Molecular Design: AI-Driven Discovery and Engineering of Advanced Semiconductor Interfaces (University of Kentucky Research Foundation) AURORA-AI: Alaska Utility Resilience and Optimization Using Real-Time AI (University of Alaska Fairbanks). Artificial Intelligence Model Teams Previously, NLR participated in multiple AI model teams addressing high-impact national challenges aligned with the goals of Genesis Mission and broader national science priorities. GridAI For trustworthy AI-driven systems to improve grid operations and reliability, including privacy-preserving federated learning approaches that enable collaboration with utilities and industry while protecting sensitive data. Intelligent Manufacturing of Energy Materials Applied AI to accelerate materials discovery and manufacturing by incorporating cost, scalability, and supply chain considerations early in the development process. Critical Minerals and Materials AI and modeling capabilities for foundation models, materials discovery, hydrological modeling, and supply chain analysis to strengthen resource development and U.S. supply chain security. About Genesis Mission DOE's Genesis Mission is designed to accelerate advances in energy, materials, computing, and other critical scientific fields while strengthening U.S. leadership in science, technology, and national security. The initiative aims to double the productivity and impact of American research and innovation within a decade. Contact Ray Grout Ray.grout@nlr.gov Share Last Updated July 22, 2026 National Laboratory of the Rockies About Research Partner With Us News Careers Contact Us Visit Subscribe to NLR Accessibility Disclaimer Security and Privacy Site Feedback Developers Employees The National Laboratory of the Rockies is a national laboratory of the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Critical Minerals and Energy Innovation, operated under Contract No. DE-AC36-08GO28308. 