 Oak Ridge National Laboratory: Big Science. Big Impact. | ORNL Skip to main content X facebook Facebook linkedin LinkedIn youtube YouTube flickr flickr Partner with ORNL Visit Contact Menu Strategic Priorities Future of Computing AI Autonomous Science Quantum Nuclear Solutions Isotopes Nuclear Fusion Atoms to Applications Materials Neutron Sciences Biotechnology Resilient Energy Systems Grid National Security Science Areas Biology & Environment Energy Science Fusion & Fission Isotopes Physical Sciences National Security Neutron Science Supercomputing Work With Us User Facilities Educational Programs Procurement Small Business Programs About Us Overview Leadership Team Visiting ORNL Our Values History Careers News Partner with ORNL Visit Contact Hit enter to search or ESC to close Hit enter to search or ESC to close --> Accelerating American Innovation Department of Energy selects ORNL to lead nine Genesis Mission projects AI-driven projects for national scientific challenges Read the full story Nuclear Advancing Next-Gen Nuclear MATERIALS From Atoms to Applications Neutrons Looking inside the Spallation Neutron Source The Genesis Mission The Genesis Mission is a Department of Energy initiative led by its 17 national laboratories to accelerate discovery, strengthen national security, and advance energy innovation through AI-driven science. At ORNL, the Discovery and Lux computing systems will power this effort and support the development of the American Science Cloud. This secure, connected environment links DOE's computing and experimental facilities to deliver solutions for national priorities. Learn more about Genesis at ORNL Learn more about the American Science Cloud Who We Are Our People are Our Greatest Strength More than 7,000 scientists, engineers, technicians, and support staff representing more than 70 nations form a dynamic culture of innovation at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Learn more about us Leading The Way Research with Impact Innovation Energy Competitiveness Security Innovation We strengthen America through discovery science enabled by multidisciplinary teams and powerful research tools, translating advancements to address national priorities. Building on our expertise and capabilities in materials, neutron science, nuclear science, and high-performance computing, we bridge the gap from fundamental research to real-world deployment, delivering breakthroughs that move innovations from the laboratory to national impact. Energy We advance technologies to ensure secure, affordable, and reliable energy to fuel the nation’s economic growth and energy independence. Our teams develop solutions across the full energy landscape—from generation and grid modernization to energy storage and end-use technologies—supporting the Department of Energy’s mission and America’s energy future. Competitiveness We accelerate the transition of research into real-world applications to drive economic prosperity, reduce costs, and give US industries an edge. Through strategic partnerships, technology transfer, and support for entrepreneurship, we foster innovation networks that create jobs, grow industries, and strengthen America's global competitiveness. Security We protect America’s future through scientific and technological breakthroughs that secure critical infrastructure and address emerging threats. Leveraging ORNL’s unique capabilities, we deliver solutions that safeguard the nation’s people, infrastructure, and economy against evolving security challenges. Recent News View all news ORNL neutron bone imaging brings T. rex to life ORNL assessment uncovers hydropower opportunities in existing dams AI automates the creation of custom materials ORNL earns record 22 R&D 100 Awards Radioisotopes power reliable nuclear batteries for nation's needs ORNL, Kyoto Fusioneering to develop fusion technology test facility in East Tennessee Department of Energy selects ORNL to lead nine Genesis Mission projects Harvesting the critical minerals future View all news Join the Team. Change the World. Leveraging the talents of its world-class researchers and exceptional support staff, Oak Ridge National Laboratory is helping solve critical scientific and technical challenges and, in so doing, creating economic opportunity for the nation. ORNL provides access to unique facilities, laboratories, and equipment, drawing thousands of visiting researchers each year. A vibrant and welcoming scientific community, ORNL embraces the pursuit of innovative ideas and invests in its people to ensure their success. Explore careers at ORNL Big Science. Big Impact. Partner with Us Collaborations are critical to modern science and engineering, and Oak Ridge National Laboratory engages in various types of collaboration with a range of organizations. From private industry, to academia, to state and local governments, various types of organizations tap into ORNL's rare expertise and resources. Learn more about partnerships User facilities “At the top of the list of ORNL strengths is the ability to deliver, to do great work and to actually get things done that matter to the country and to the world.” Stephen K. Streiffer Director Facts & Stats 70+ Nationalities represented in the workforce 1,132 Patents issued since 2010 2,000+ Scientific publications per year Learn more about ORNL Oak Ridge National Laboratory 1 Bethel Valley Road Oak Ridge, TN 37830 (+1) 865.241.6765 Connect With Us Partnerships Visit Contact News Newsroom Newsletter Signup Media Contacts Research Science Areas User Facilities Centers & Institutes Resources Internal Users Directory Oak Ridge National Laboratory is managed by UT-Battelle LLC for the US Department of Energy Privacy Accessibility/508 Nondiscrimination/1557 Vulnerability Disclosure Program 