 Qubit Engineering debuts AI-powered tool to analyze the modern power grid Skip to main content X facebook Facebook linkedin LinkedIn youtube YouTube flickr flickr Partner with ORNL Visit Contact Menu Strategic Priorities Future of Computing AI Autonomous Science Quantum Nuclear Solutions Isotopes Nuclear Fusion Atoms to Applications Materials Neutron Sciences Biotechnology Resilient Energy Systems Grid National Security Science Areas Biology & Environment Energy Science Fusion & Fission Isotopes Physical Sciences National Security Neutron Science Supercomputing Work With Us User Facilities Educational Programs Procurement Small Business Programs About Us Overview Leadership Team Visiting ORNL Our Values History Careers News Partner with ORNL Visit Contact Hit enter to search or ESC to close Hit enter to search or ESC to close --> ORNL Partnerships About News Technology Transfer Economic Development Strategic Partnerships Collaboration Nation For Startups/Entrepreneurs Innovation Crossroads Organization News Qubit Engineering debuts AI-powered tool to analyze the modern power grid Published: January 9, 2026 Updated: March 5, 2026 Qubit Engineering , part of the 2023 Innovation Crossroads cohort at the Department of Energy’s Oak Ridge National Laboratory, recently launched Neuro-Grid, a computational tool that uses artificial intelligence for real-time, high-accuracy analysis of the power grid to offer insights not available through classical computing. Qubit leveraged Frontier, the world’s first exascale supercomputer housed at ORNL’s Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility (OLCF), to develop Neuro-Grid. What’s the technology As a graphical neural network, Neuro-Grid is designed to meet the needs of a modern, evolving energy system by analyzing raw grid data and delivering insights quickly and efficiently, even with limited or missing data. Qubit is developing a component that will provide contingency and risk analysis, which could evaluate different scenarios, such as weather events or localized demands on the system. This information is critical to maintaining a reliable and resilient energy grid. What’s the impact Qubit is submitting proposals to local power companies within the Tennessee valley, which comprises seven states, to cater Neuro-Grid for their usage, and map and analyze their distribution system. ORNL’s Innovation Crossroads Advantage With support from the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) and the Department of Energy Office of Science’s Advanced Scientific Computing Research program, Qubit advanced R&D through Innovation Crossroads and partnered with Oak Ridge National Laboratory and TVA for critical testing and validation. Qubit leveraged Frontier, the world’s first exascale supercomputer housed at ORNL’s Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility (OLCF) , to develop Neuro-Grid. With the resources of OLCF, Qubit was able to optimize Neuro-Grid to run on the cloud, making the software accessible for a variety of industry partners without losing computational power. “Using Frontier helped us understand the model and its limitations. By rethinking our model, we downsized the computational resources needed. We could make the model more efficient, requiring less data and fewer computational resources,” said Marouane Salhi, Qubit CEO and co-founder. “ORNL was the testbed for our ideas, and it set us on our way for further development. Through Innovation Crossroads, we had access to experts who have years of expertise in different fields,” Salhi said. Salhi was an ORNL postdoctoral research fellow from 2016 to 2018. The OLCF is a DOE Office of Science user facility and part of the Genesis Mission , DOE's initiative to secure American leadership in AI for science, energy, and national security. The Neuro-Grid interface translates AI-developed analysis into user-accessible insights that enable high-accuracy analysis of the power grid, even with limited or missing data. The lines pictured here represent power transmission lines, and the orange dots indicate buses operating at their critical limit. Credit: Qubit Engineering. What’s next Learn more about Qubit Engineering , which develops cutting-edge AI and optimization technology to enable power utilities to manage and operate their grid infrastructure. Interested in learning more? Are you an aspiring hard tech entrepreneur? Learn more about Innovation Crossroads . Media Contact Brynn B Downing , Executive Communications Specialist , DOWNINGCB@ORNL.GOV Organizations Partnerships Technology Transfer Innovation Crossroads Science Area Quantum Science Artificial Intelligence Oak Ridge National Laboratory 1 Bethel Valley Road Oak Ridge, TN 37830 (+1) 865.241.6765 Connect With Us Partnerships Visit Contact News Newsroom Newsletter Signup Media Contacts Research Science Areas User Facilities Centers & Institutes Resources Internal Users Directory Oak Ridge National Laboratory is managed by UT-Battelle LLC for the US Department of Energy Privacy Accessibility/508 Nondiscrimination/1557 Vulnerability Disclosure Program 