 IBM --> Serving smart engagement Get closer than courtside with IBM and the US Open. See how AI converts data into intelligence, turning billions of data points into meaningful engagement and business value. Step into smarter play Turn AI into business value Use your mouse, touch or arrow keys to play. First to 5 wins. Play game Recommended for you Free trial Experience the full power of IBM Bob: Get 50 Bobcoins for 30 days News Discover how Anthropic's latest research opens new visibility into AI decision-making Insight The model that built IT is changing. See what's replacing it. Blog Learn how IBM's modular cryogenic architecture supports the future of fault-tolerant quantum computing Top enterprise technology Innovation makes an impact when customers see results. Explore the IBM products recognized in the TrustRadius 2026 Top Rated Awards , where verified reviews highlight real-world value at scale. Save big on top products Code faster with IBM Bob™ "We achieved 100% refactored code. Everything I thought would be a problem, Bob solved."—APIS IT Manage AI agents with IBM watsonx Orchestrate® IBM watsonx Orchestrate powers AI agents that cut HR costs by 40% and resolve 94% of employee requests automatically Real-time data streaming with IBM Confluent "Since we built Horus on top of Confluent, we’ve been able to save over a million dollars in what we were paying other vendors for."—SecurityScorecard Optimize storage for AI with IBM FlashSystem® Run smarter storage: zero downtime, AI optimization and at least 40% lower costs with IBM FlashSystem Protect identities and sensitive access with IBM Vault® "Vault has ... lowered how much effort it takes to meet regulatory compliance goals and reduced our risk of both a breach and unplanned downtime."—NORD/LB Optimize asset performance with IBM Maximo® Reduce unplanned downtime by 47% and extend asset lifespan by 17% with IBM Maximo Plan with confidence using IBM Planning Analytics Volkswagen Group Services reduced monthly reporting time from 7 days to just seconds and increased HR productivity by 85% with IBM Planning Analytics Put AI to work with IBM Consulting® Partner with 150,000+ experts in IBM Consulting®, the only global consultancy within a major technology company Explore all IBM products Explore all IBM products The new economics of AI | 17 September 2026, 11 AM ET Learn how IT, finance and business leaders are optimizing AI spend, measuring ROI and scaling AI with confidence. Register for live webinar Smarter impact powered by IBM Explore how US Open powers up fan engagement through smarter technology 1.2 billion data points captured and analyzed throughout the tournament See how Riverty speeds development with built-in security from IBM Vault 50-75% faster ticket resolution with self-service IaC Discover how Citadelle enables trusted recovery with IBM FlashSystem 80% fewer manual backup tasks Learn how IBM unlocked USD 4.5 billion+ in productivity with AI 86% of routine issues solved with AskIT Training for what’s next Professional training Explore flexible courses and certifications to deepen your skills and prepare for new challenges. Strengthen your expertise Foundational skills Develop essential skills, unlock new possibilities and get ready for the next stage of your career. Start shaping tomorrow Student pathways Elevate your career readiness with learning paths and courses on the skills shaping tomorrow’s jobs. Begin your success journey Develop practical AI skills with IBM Bob Stay connected What’s New at IBM newsletter subscription Latest News New IBM Study Finds AI Adoption Is Outpacing K-12 Readiness IBM Completes Acquisition of HRL Laboratories to Accelerate the Future of Quantum IBM Unveils Next Generation Dual-Architecture Processor for IBM Z and LinuxONE IBM Brings AI-Powered US Open Fan Experience Back to Madison Square Park IBM and the USTA Introduce New AI-Powered Fan Experiences for 2026 US Open IBM Study: Sports Fans Want Streamlined Digital Experiences as Platform Choices Expand IBM Connects Its First Modular Cryogenic Systems in Milestone Toward Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computing IBM Partners with OpenAI to Accelerate Secure AI Deployment for Enterprises Across Core Operations 