 AI-enabled discovery of rare earth elements | ORNL Skip to main content X facebook Facebook linkedin LinkedIn youtube YouTube flickr flickr Partner with ORNL Visit Contact Menu Strategic Priorities Future of Computing AI Autonomous Science Quantum Nuclear Solutions Isotopes Nuclear Fusion Atoms to Applications Materials Neutron Sciences Biotechnology Resilient Energy Systems Grid National Security Science Areas Biology & Environment Energy Science Fusion & Fission Isotopes Physical Sciences National Security Neutron Science Supercomputing Work With Us User Facilities Educational Programs Procurement Small Business Programs About Us Overview Leadership Team Visiting ORNL Our Values History Careers News Partner with ORNL Visit Contact Hit enter to search or ESC to close Hit enter to search or ESC to close --> Genesis Mission Project AI-enabled discovery of rare earth elements Analyzing the potential for heavy rare earth element resources in granitic terrains across the southeastern U.S. Credit: Andy Sproles/ORNL, U.S. Dept. of Energy Physics-Informed AI for Accelerated Discovery of Ion-Adsorption-Type Rare Earth Element Resources in Granitic Systems Heavy rare earth elements (REEs) are essential for modern industry, yet the United States relies heavily on imported supplies. Most of the world's heavy REEs come from deposits in Asia that formed as granite slowly broke down over time. In these deposits, the REEs are loosely attached to secondary minerals formed during weathering, making them easier to recover. Scientists still do not fully understand why these deposits become enriched with REEs, making it difficult to identify similar resources in the United States. This project will investigate how natural processes, including rock weathering, water infiltration, and landscape erosion, can move and concentrate REEs. The team will develop a physics-informed AI framework that integrates field observations, laboratory experiments, and computer models to improve predictions of where these deposits may occur. Initial work will focus on three granite watersheds in North Carolina. The resulting approach will speed the discovery of new domestic sources of heavy REEs across the southeastern United States. Partners University of Maryland Syracuse University Pennsylvania State University Researchers Xin Gu Dan Lu Chengping Chai Organizations Biological and Environmental Systems Science Directorate Computing and Computational Sciences Directorate Oak Ridge National Laboratory 1 Bethel Valley Road Oak Ridge, TN 37830 (+1) 865.241.6765 Connect With Us Partnerships Visit Contact News Newsroom Newsletter Signup Media Contacts Research Science Areas User Facilities Centers & Institutes Resources Internal Users Directory Oak Ridge National Laboratory is managed by UT-Battelle LLC for the US Department of Energy Privacy Accessibility/508 Nondiscrimination/1557 Vulnerability Disclosure Program 