 AI-enabled subsurface biogeochemical modeling | ORNL Skip to main content X facebook Facebook linkedin LinkedIn youtube YouTube flickr flickr Partner with ORNL Visit Contact Menu Strategic Priorities Future of Computing AI Autonomous Science Quantum Nuclear Solutions Isotopes Nuclear Fusion Atoms to Applications Materials Neutron Sciences Biotechnology Resilient Energy Systems Grid National Security Science Areas Biology & Environment Energy Science Fusion & Fission Isotopes Physical Sciences National Security Neutron Science Supercomputing Work With Us User Facilities Educational Programs Procurement Small Business Programs About Us Overview Leadership Team Visiting ORNL Our Values History Careers News Partner with ORNL Visit Contact Hit enter to search or ESC to close Hit enter to search or ESC to close --> Genesis Mission Project AI-enabled subsurface biogeochemical modeling AI-enabled predictive modeling of the subsurface critical zone across variable U.S. landscapes. Credit: Andy Sproles/ORNL, U.S. Dept. of Energy Spanning the land surface through deeper soils and into the bedrock, the subsurface critical zone represents a crucial area for resources such as critical minerals. Resource availability is shaped by complex geochemical, biological, and ecohydrological interactions, and predicting how biogeochemical cycling varies over space and time remains a major scientific hurdle. Current models are computationally expensive, lack critical subsurface processes, and have limited capacity to ingest observational data. Large datasets of subsurface moisture, temperature, and biogeochemistry such as those collected in Critical Zone Observatories and Critical Zone Networks, combined with emerging AI tools, represent an opportunity to build more efficient and accurate subsurface models. This project will combine mechanistic model simulations with extensive subsurface measurements to train a novel, AI-driven biogeochemical solver. The resulting AI-enabled system will integrate observational data with process knowledge to provide transformative improvements in computational efficiency and accuracy, enabling rapid, precise predictions of subsurface biogeochemical processes at scales relevant to DOE missions. Partners Auburn University University of California Riverside Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Researchers Benjamin N Sulman Phong V Le Ming Fan Organizations Biological and Environmental Systems Science Directorate Computing and Computational Sciences Directorate Oak Ridge National Laboratory 1 Bethel Valley Road Oak Ridge, TN 37830 (+1) 865.241.6765 Connect With Us Partnerships Visit Contact News Newsroom Newsletter Signup Media Contacts Research Science Areas User Facilities Centers & Institutes Resources Internal Users Directory Oak Ridge National Laboratory is managed by UT-Battelle LLC for the US Department of Energy Privacy Accessibility/508 Nondiscrimination/1557 Vulnerability Disclosure Program 