 AI technology boosts confidence, cuts costs in metal 3D printing Skip to main content X facebook Facebook linkedin LinkedIn youtube YouTube flickr flickr Partner with ORNL Visit Contact Menu Strategic Priorities Future of Computing AI Autonomous Science Quantum Nuclear Solutions Isotopes Nuclear Fusion Atoms to Applications Materials Neutron Sciences Biotechnology Resilient Energy Systems Grid National Security Science Areas Biology & Environment Energy Science Fusion & Fission Isotopes Physical Sciences National Security Neutron Science Supercomputing Work With Us User Facilities Educational Programs Procurement Small Business Programs About Us Overview Leadership Team Visiting ORNL Our Values History Careers News Partner with ORNL Visit Contact Hit enter to search or ESC to close Hit enter to search or ESC to close --> Secure and Digital Manufacturing Section Manufacturing Systems Analytics Group Research Highlight AI technology boosts confidence, cuts costs in metal 3D printing Published: May 28, 2026 Updated: May 28, 2026 Peregrine assesses the quality of parts in real time, without the need for expensive characterization equipment. Credit: Morgan Manning/ORNL, U.S. Dept. of Energy What if a 3D printer could catch its own mistakes — and tell you instantly whether a part is good to use? At the Department of Energy’s Manufacturing Demonstration Facility (MDF) at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, researchers are making that possible with Peregrine , an AI-enabled technology that brings greater intelligence to metal additive manufacturing. Peregrine acts like a vigilant digital inspector, watching every layer as a component is built. “Instead of lengthy and expensive inspections to see if a part meets performance standards, technologies like Peregrine can give you a thumbs up or down as you print the part,” said Luke Scime, a staff scientist in Manufacturing Systems Analytics at the MDF. “It also solves the problem of geometries that can't be inspected non-destructively, even if you had infinite time and money.” Over the years, the research team has transformed Peregrine from a basic monitoring concept into a sophisticated artificial intelligence platform with sensors capable of analyzing builds as they happen and even stopping a print before a defect becomes a costly failure. Future improvements include drawing on historical manufacturing data so the system can suggest better printing strategies. “We’ve focused mostly on laser, electron beam and binder jetting powder bed systems,” Scime said. “But in theory, this approach can work for any powder bed printing process.” By expanding AI capabilities, Peregrine gives US manufacturers faster answers, lower costs and greater confidence in every build. The research was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy’s Advanced Materials and Manufacturing Technologies Office (AMMTO) in the Office of Critical Minerals and Energy Innovation, the Air Force Research Laboratory and DOE’s Office of Nuclear Energy, with additional support from the Genesis Mission . MDF, where this work was conducted, is supported by AMMTO and acts as a nationwide consortium of collaborators focused on innovating, inspiring and catalyzing the transformation of U.S. manufacturing. UT-Battelle manages ORNL for DOE’s Office of Science , the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States. The Office of Science is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. Researchers Luke R Scime Organizations Energy Science and Technology Directorate Manufacturing Science Division Secure and Digital Manufacturing Section Manufacturing Systems Analytics Group Advanced Manufacturing and Industrial Technologies Programs User Facilities Manufacturing Demonstration Facility Science Area Energy Science Advanced Manufacturing Artificial Intelligence Genesis Mission Related Content News National laboratory research collaboration focuses on accelerated qualification of critical nuclear components Success Story Digital manufacturing saves critical qualification time News Engineers, plant biologists automate plant transformation for faster discovery News Peregrine releases new dataset for smarter 3D printing Oak Ridge National Laboratory 1 Bethel Valley Road Oak Ridge, TN 37830 (+1) 865.241.6765 Connect With Us Partnerships Visit Contact News Newsroom Newsletter Signup Media Contacts Research Science Areas User Facilities Centers & Institutes Resources Internal Users Directory Oak Ridge National Laboratory is managed by UT-Battelle LLC for the US Department of Energy Privacy Accessibility/508 Nondiscrimination/1557 Vulnerability Disclosure Program 