 Lux – Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility Skip to main content x-twitter facebook linkedin instagram Oak Ridge National Laboratory Event Calendar Staff Directory MyOLCF Center Status Hit enter to search or ESC to close Close Search search Menu About OLCF Overview Our History Leadership Team Staff Sections & Groups Advanced Technologies HPC Operations Science Engagement HPC Systems Staff Directory Industry Partnership Program Exascale Computing Roundtable Center Reports Media Assets OLCF Resources Compute Resources Introducing Lux Introducing Discovery Frontier Summit Andes Quantum (QCUP) Testbeds Data & Visualization Resources Visualization Gallery Orion EVEREST HPSS Constellation Science at OLCF Biology Chemistry Computer Science Earth Science Engineering Fusion Materials Science Nuclear Energy Physics Quantum Community Careers Event Calendar Pathways to Supercomputing Monthly User Conference Calls OLCF User Group Visiting & Tours News User Support search Lux: ORNL's AI + HPC Supercomputer ORNL’s Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility (OLCF) is introducing the AMD Lux AI+HPC supercomputer to enable its users to dramatically accelerate AI- driven research. OLCF brings a rich history of deploying and operating leadership supercomputers since 2004 including the first supercomputer to use GPUs at scale (Titan in 2012), the first to use HBM and NVLINK (Summit in 2018), and the first to achieve 1 ExaFLOP in FP64 performance (Frontier in 2022). In a unique public-private partnership model, AMD is co-investing with DOE to deliver Lux. AMD brings world-leading X86 CPU performance and unmatched GPU memory capacity and bandwidth, offering excellent AI and HPC (modeling and simulation) performance. The AMD Lux AI Cluster, will be deployed at ORNL within the next six months to expand DOE’s near-term AI capacity and accelerate progress on critical problems. Credit: AMD and ORNL Built for AI and HPC Lux will have AMD’s MI355X GPUs with 288 GB of HBM3E with 8 TB/s of bandwidth. The MI355X provides 5 PF of AI training (FP8) performance and 78 TF of HPC (modeling and simulation using FP64) performance. Lux will have both Slurm and Kubernetes support for resource scheduling. The size of the partitions will depend on demand and will adjust over time. Storage is Included While each node has over 24 TB of NVMe SSDs for high performance reading and writing, Lux allocations also will include access to OLCF’s Lustre file system, Orion, with over 600 PB of capacity. And Lux partners with Frontier allocations can create data sets written from Frontier to Orion and then train on those data sets on Lux. DOE Moderate Security Controls Lux will use DOE Moderate controls, the same level of security controls as OLCF’s leadership system, Frontier. DOE Moderate controls allow for export-controlled applications and data. OLCF plans to add support for DOE Moderate- Enhanced controls. When available, this would also enable support for International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) and Protected Health Information (PHI) applications and data. Flexible Allocation Dates Half of Lux ’s annual 3.5 million node-hours are dedicated to the Genesis Mission to accelerate scientific discovery, with the remaining half available for proprietary (paid for) use under the DOE User Facility rate. Proprietary projects can begin in any month and run from six months to five years. Unique Partnering Opportunity on Lux As with previous OLCF supercomputers, OLCF will operate Lux on behalf of DOE. Half of Lux’s annual 3.5 million node-hours are dedicated to serving the Genesis Mission to accelerate scientific discovery. The other half are reserved for paid access by public and private sector partners. AMD will use these cycles for development and testing. In addition, AMD will make a portion of the reserved time available for new partners, public or private, and work with them to get the most performance for their AI and HPC workloads. Lux partners purchase a node-hours amount and can consume these node-hours at any scale from single-node jobs to full system jobs[1]. No other system offers access to large-scale GPUs without requiring a long-term, reserved commitment. A minimum 175K node-hours per six-month commitment is required. This would allow, for example, 400-node (3,200 GPUs) jobs for eighteen days (spread over six months) or approximately 40 nodes of continuous use for six months. Interested partners can contact [email protected] to get started. OLCF representatives will discuss the application process and help you begin the process. [1] Full system jobs may be limited to less than 4,000 GPUs depending on nodes dedicated to persistent services, etc. Lux System Specifications 4,000+ GPUs MI355X GPUs in 500+ nodes 1.1 PB HBM To solve large problems 288 GB/GPU High memory per GPU for better scaling 40 ExaFLOPS For AI inference using FP4 20 ExaFLOPS For AI training using FP8 317 PetaFLOPS For HPC (modeling and simulation) using FP64 Ultra Ethernet 400G NIC per GPU AI + HPC Slurm and Kubernetes; Robust user environment supporting AI and HPC workloads Latest Lux Highlights Filter All Lux ORNL, AMD, and HPE to Deliver DOE’s Newest AI Supercomputers: Discovery and Lux The U.S. Department of Energy announced today its newest supercomputers, Discovery and Lux, at Oak Ridge National Laboratory that will expand America’s leadership in artificial intelligence for scientific computing, strengthen national security, and drive the… Katie Bethea October 27, 2025 6 min Oak Ridge National Laboratory is managed by UT-Battelle for the US Department of Energy. DOE Office of Science ORNL.GOV Battelle.org Contact Us Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility One Bethel Valley Rd P.O. Box 2008 Oak Ridge, TN 37831 Support Email: [email protected] Quick Links MyOLCF User Documentation Resource Guides Documents & Forms Accounts & Projects Training Calendar Contact & Support Careers Connect with OLCF Like Us On Facebook Follow Us On Twitter Connect On LinkedIn Watch Us On Vimeo See Us On Instagram Fave Us On Flickr © 2026 Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility. Accessibility | Privacy | Feedback Close Menu Oak Ridge National Laboratory About OLCF Overview Our History Leadership Team Staff Sections & Groups Advanced Technologies HPC Operations Science Engagement HPC Systems Staff Directory Industry Partnership Program Exascale Computing Roundtable Center Reports Media Assets OLCF Resources Compute Resources Introducing Lux Introducing Discovery Frontier Summit Andes Quantum (QCUP) Testbeds Data & Visualization Resources Visualization Gallery Orion EVEREST HPSS Constellation Science at OLCF Biology Chemistry Computer Science Earth Science Engineering Fusion Materials Science Nuclear Energy Physics Quantum Community Careers Event Calendar Pathways to Supercomputing Monthly User Conference Calls OLCF User Group Visiting & Tours News User Support Event Calendar Staff Directory MyOLCF Center Status x-twitter facebook linkedin instagram 