 DOE and Princeton University extend, strengthen partnership Skip to main content Princeton University Menu News News Submenu All Stories Research Roundup Princeton in the News Search Search Sites & People × DOE and Princeton University extend, strengthen partnership Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn Email Print By the Office of Communications on Aug. 24, 2026, 10 a.m. PPPL’s primary fusion experiment is the National Spherical Torus Experiment-Upgrade (NSTX-U), which is designed to be the world’s most powerful spherical tokamak. Photo by PPPL Office of Communications The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) and Princeton University have extended the contract for Princeton’s management and operation of the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL), located on the University’s Forrestal Campus in Plainsboro, New Jersey. “Princeton is proud to continue its longstanding partnership with the U.S. Department of Energy, building on a shared commitment to scientific excellence,” said Peter Schiffer, the University’s dean for research and vice president for PPPL. “PPPL is renowned for innovative and world-leading plasma research and advancing the science and engineering needed to realize fusion energy.” “At PPPL, we have big ideas and do big science that reverberates around the world and through history,” said Steve Cowley, PPPL laboratory director. “We're excited to continue that tradition through our renewed partnership with Princeton University, enabling us to pursue groundbreaking science for years to come.” PPPL’s historic focus on plasma and fusion research has recently expanded to include substantial research efforts in microelectronics, quantum computing and artificial intelligence. PPPL’s primary fusion experiment is the National Spherical Torus Experiment-Upgrade (NSTX-U), which is designed to be the world’s most powerful spherical tokamak. The Laboratory is also home to the Facility for Laboratory Reconnection Experiments, a national collaborative research facility studying magnetic reconnection. Under the five-year contract extension, which commences April 1, 2027, the University expects to invest in increasing collaborations with Princeton faculty, exploring a next-generation facility for fusion energy research, and enhancing site infrastructure and safety for the next phase of operations. PPPL partners with industry and research institutions to advance the development of fusion and plasma technologies. As one of the select participants in DOE’s Genesis Mission , the Laboratory pioneers artificial intelligence and high-performance computing to accelerate fusion research. It also collaborates with private companies through DOE’s Innovation Network for Fusion Energy (INFUSE) program, the Milestone-Based Fusion Development program and through other partnership channels. PPPL is also working with the New Jersey Economic Development Authority and venture capital firm SOSV to launch the NJ HAX Plasma Forge to accelerate plasma technology commercialization and start-up development in New Jersey. Princeton has operated PPPL since the Laboratory’s inception in 1951, when it was called Project Matterhorn and under the leadership of founding Director Lyman Spitzer. PPPL is one of 10 National Laboratories stewarded by DOE’s Office of Science, and one of only 17 DOE laboratories nationwide. Together, these laboratories comprise a preeminent federal research system that provides the nation with strategic scientific and technological capabilities. Related Stories DOE extends University PPPL contract . On March 21, the DOE and Princeton University signed a five-year extension of the contract for Princeton’s management and operation of the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory. U.S. Secretary of Energy Wright visits Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory . Wright emphasized the role of national laboratories in advancing science research priorities. Delivery of magnet bundle to Princeton Plasma Physics Lab signals a new age of fusion research . PPPL’s new National Spherical Torus Experiment-Upgrade will play an important role in the Department of Energy's Fusion Science & Technology Roadmap to a competitive U.S. fusion energy industry. NJ HAX Plasma Forge, a new strategic innovation center, is coming to the Princeton area . The Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory will partner with venture capital firm SOSV and the New Jersey Economic Development Authority to advance plasma technologies with an eye toward commercial impact. Visiting officials from DOE's Office of Science learn about PPPL’s expanded mission . Asmeret Asefaw Berhe, Director of the Office of Science, visited the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory in February. A timeline of innovation and impact at Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory . DOE extends University PPPL contract . The U.S. Department of Energy announced March 15 that Princeton University will continue to manage and operate the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory through March 31, 2022. View All News Princeton University Main navigation Meet Princeton Submenu for Meet Princeton In Service of Humanity Facts & Figures History Honors & Awards Contact Us Visit Us Our Faculty Our Students Our Alumni Our Staff Our Leadership Academic Freedom and Free Expression Strategic Planning Framework Princeton University’s Impact Academics Submenu for Academics Studying at Princeton Library Areas of Study Humanities Social Sciences Engineering Natural Sciences Advising Academic Calendar Course Tools Learning Abroad Career Development Continuing Education Innovative Learning Research Submenu for Research Engineering & Applied Science Humanities Natural Sciences Social Sciences Dean for Research Office Interdisciplinary Approach External Partnerships Facilities & Labs One Community Submenu for One Community Lifelong Connections Student Life Arts & Culture Athletics Living in Princeton, N.J. Housing & Dining Activities & Organizations Cultural & Affinity Groups Health & Wellness Religious Life Serving the Public Good Families Admission & Aid Submenu for Admission & Aid Affordable for All About Financial Aid Current Undergraduate Financial Aid Undergraduate Admission Graduate Admission For International Students StandUp . Stand Up for Princeton and Higher Education Athletics . Go Princeton Tigers Utility menu News Events Work at Princeton Student Links Alumni Giving Inside Princeton Contact links Contact Us Accessibility Help Directory Visiting links Plan a Visit Maps & Shuttles Varsity Athletics Giving to Princeton Academic links Library Academic Calendar Student Links Faculty & Staff Links Footer social media Facebook Twitter Instagram Snapchat LinkedIn YouTube Bluesky Social Media Directory Diversity and Non-discrimination Equal Opportunity and Non-discrimination at Princeton University: Princeton University believes that commitment to equal opportunity for all is favorable to the free and open exchange of ideas, and the University seeks to reach out as widely as possible in order to attract the most qualified individuals as students, faculty, and staff. In applying this policy, the University is committed to nondiscrimination on the basis of personal beliefs or characteristics such as political views, religion, national origin, ancestry, race, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, pregnancy and related conditions, age, marital or domestic partnership status, veteran status, disability and/or other characteristics protected by applicable law in any phase of its education or employment programs or activities. In addition, pursuant to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 and supporting regulations, Princeton does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the education programs or activities that it operates; this extends to admission and employment. Inquiries about the application of Title IX and its supporting regulations may be directed to the University’s Sexual Misconduct/Title IX Coordinator or to the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, Office for Civil Rights, U.S. Department of Education. See Princeton’s full Equal Opportunity Policy and Nondiscrimination Statement . Princeton University Princeton, NJ 08544 Operator: (609) 258-3000 © 2026 The Trustees of Princeton University Subfooter links Copyright Infringement Privacy Notice 