 DOE launches Genesis Mission to transform American science and innovation through AI computing revolution – LabNews Skip to main content Exceptional service in the national interest About Sandia History Leadership Mission Environmental Responsibility Community Involvement Belonging at Sandia Social Media Facts & Figures Board of Managers News News Releases Media Contacts Lab News Image Gallery Publications Videos Alert Messages Research Laboratory Directed R&D Programs Facilities R&D 100 Awards Publications Partnerships Technology Partnerships Licensing / Technology Transfer Academic Programs Local Opportunities & Economic Impact Prospective Suppliers Current Suppliers Careers View All Jobs Students & Postdocs Veterans Career Disciplines Benefits Belonging at Sandia Hiring Process About Sandia History Leadership Mission Environmental Responsibility Community Involvement Belonging at Sandia Social Media Facts & Figures Board of Managers News News Releases Media Contacts Lab News Image Gallery Publications Videos Alert Messages Research Laboratory Directed R&D Programs Facilities R&D 100 Awards Publications Partnerships Technology Partnerships Licensing / Technology Transfer Academic Programs Local Opportunities & Economic Impact Prospective Suppliers Current Suppliers Careers View All Jobs Students & Postdocs Veterans Career Disciplines Benefits Belonging at Sandia Hiring Process Locations/​Visiting Contact Us Employee Resources Security Toolcart About Sandia News Research Partnerships Careers LabNews Lab News Topics Past Articles Lab News Topics Past Articles Sandia Lab News Download This Issue (PDF) Contact Us Subscribe to the Lab News email Subscribe to the LabNews email New issues every two weeks. Unsubscribe at any time. Email addresses are never shared. Subscribe Subscribe Successful Thank you for subscribing! Close Sandia Lab News | https://www.sandia.gov/labnews/2025/12/04/doe-launches-genesis-mission-to-transform-american-science-and-innovation-through-ai-computing-revolution/ DOE launches Genesis Mission to transform American science and innovation through AI computing revolution BY DARRICK HURST THURSDAY, DECEMBER 4, 2025 WATCH PARTY — Sandia leadership watches Dario Gil, DOE under secretary for Science and director of the Genesis Mission, introduce the national effort during a live broadcast on Dec. 1. (Photo by Craig Fritz) Sandia is advancing the DOE’s Genesis Mission to transform artificial intelligence for national security, energy resilience and scientific discovery. As the nation’s engineering laboratory, Sandia applies AI at every scale — from brain-inspired grid monitoring to stockpile surveillance and agile manufacturing — to strengthen U.S. deterrence and infrastructure. With world-class platforms like the Hala Point neuromorphic system and the Cerebras Kingfisher cluster, Sandia is pioneering energy-efficient, mission-grade AI hardware and accelerating “deterrence on demand.” Through partnerships with industry, academia and Tri-Lab collaborators, Sandia is shaping a secure, AI-driven future for the nation. On Nov. 24, President Donald Trump issued an Executive Order to launch the Genesis Mission, a historic national effort led by the DOE. The Genesis Mission will transform American science and innovation through the power of artificial intelligence, strengthening the nation’s technological leadership and global competitiveness. The ambitious mission will harness the current AI and advanced computing revolution to double the productivity and impact of American science and engineering within a decade. It will deliver decisive breakthroughs to secure American energy dominance, accelerate scientific discovery and strengthen national security. “Throughout history, from the Manhattan Project to the Apollo mission, our nation’s brightest minds and industries have answered the call when their nation needed them,” said U.S. Secretary of Energy Chris Wright. “Today, the United States is calling on them once again. Under President Trump’s leadership, the Genesis Mission will unleash the full power of our national laboratories, supercomputers and data resources to ensure that America is the global leader in artificial intelligence and to usher in a new golden era of American discovery.” AI REVOLUTION — President Trump issued an Executive Order to launch the Genesis Mission, aimed at harnessing AI and advanced computing to double the productivity and impact of American science and engineering within a decade. (Image courtesy of the DOE) The announcement builds on President Trump’s Executive Order Removing Barriers to American Leadership In Artificial Intelligence and advances his America’s AI Action Plan released earlier this year — a directive to remove barriers to innovation, reduce dependence on foreign adversaries and unleash the full strength of America’s scientific enterprise. Secretary Wright has designated Under Secretary for Science Darío Gil to lead the initiative. The Genesis Mission will mobilize the DOE’s 17 national laboratories, industry and academia to build an integrated discovery platform. The platform will connect the world’s best supercomputers, AI systems and next-generation quantum systems with the most advanced scientific instruments in the nation. Once complete, the platform will be the world’s most complex and powerful scientific instrument ever built. It will draw on the expertise of roughly 40,000 DOE scientists, engineers, and technical staff, alongside private sector innovators, to ensure that the United States leads and builds the technologies that will define the future. The Genesis Mission will focus on addressing three key challenges of national importance: American energy dominance: The Genesis Mission will accelerate advanced nuclear, fusion and grid modernization using AI to provide affordable, reliable and secure energy for Americans. Advancing discovery science: Through DOE’s investment and collaboration with industry, America is building the quantum ecosystem that will power discoveries — and industries — for decades to come. Ensuring national security: DOE will create advanced AI technologies for national security missions, deploy systems to ensure the safety and reliability of the U.S. nuclear stockpile, and accelerate the development of defense-ready materials. Recent articles by Darrick Hurst Sandia selected to lead six Genesis Mission projects, partner on 17 others National security leader Laura McGill named next director of Sandia SHARE THIS ARTICLE ISSUE December 4, 2025 Future of geothermal in New Mexico DOE launches Genesis Mission to transform American science and innovation through AI computing revolution Sandia Ironwoman forever chasing a challenge Kinetic careers Leaders give back during fall forum Honoring veterans at Sandia Staff step up for Sandia Serves day Topics This article is tagged with the following topics: Artificial intelligence, People + Events Articles in topic Artificial intelligence Articles in topic People + Events About Sandia News Research Partnerships Careers Locations/Visiting Contact Us Employee Resources Security Toolcart Questions & Comments | Privacy & Security © 2026 National Technology and Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC. Sandia National Laboratories is a multimission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology and Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC., a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International, Inc., for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA-0003525. Learn about the Department of Energy's Vulnerability Disclosure Program Top 