 Energy Department launches ‘Genesis Mission’ to transform American science and innovation through the AI computing revolution - Savannah River National Laboratory Skip to content About Us Expand Why SRNL Our Leadership Community Involvement Conferences Expand Actinide Separations Conference National Security Enterprise Careers Expand Open Positions Internships & Research Programs Postdoctoral Opportunities Life at SRNL Connect With Us Research Areas Expand Environmental Stewardship Expand Nuclear Material Processing & Disposition Tank Waste Processing & Disposition Groundwater & Soil Remediation Expand About ALTEMIS The ALTEMIS Approach Technology Transfer Applications & Expansion Links & Documents Staff & Contacts Network of National Laboratories for Environmental Management and Stewardship National Security Expand Nuclear Materials Recovery Weapons Production Technology Plutonium Pit Production Program Nonproliferation Cyber Security & Threat Assessment Tritium Focus Group Emerging Science & Technology Expand Genesis Mission Hydrogen Production & Storage Laboratory Directed Research & Development Partner With Us Expand Academia Expand Postdoctoral Opportunities Expand Eisenhower Postdoctoral Research Fellowship Internships Joint Appointments Industry Partners Expand Technologies & Licensing Technology Partnerships Technical Contacts Ombudsman Procurement Capabilities Expand Advanced Manufacturing Collaborative Regulatory Center of Excellence Atmospheric Technologies Group Network of Analytical Laboratories Advanced Modeling & Simulation Mesoscale Transport & Flux Facility Newsroom Expand News Releases Story Tips Our Stories Podcast Videos MATTER Magazine Fact Sheets Search Toggle Menu All Articles 2025 Releases Energy Department launches ‘Genesis Mission’ to transform American science and innovation through the AI computing revolution November 25, 2025 AIKEN, S.C. – Savannah River National Laboratory proudly joins the Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission to advance AI, enhancing America’s energy resilience, environmental stewardship and national security. Our leadership in environmental management, combined with the Advanced Manufacturing Collaborative facility, uniquely positions us to integrate AI and innovative technologies to address legacy waste, improve environmental clean-up efforts and develop efficient processes and economically produced materials. Leveraging expertise in chemical processing, nuclear materials management and emerging computational technologies, SRNL is committed to mission-critical advancements that fosters innovation and reinforces U.S. leadership in scientific discovery and technology solutions. Following is the full Department of Energy announcement of the Genesis Mission . WASHINGTON – President Trump today issued an Executive Order to launch the Genesis Mission, a historic national effort led by the Department of Energy. The Genesis Mission will transform American science and innovation through the power of artificial intelligence (AI), strengthening the nation’s technological leadership and global competitiveness. The ambitious mission will harness the current AI and advanced computing revolution to double the productivity and impact of American science and engineering within a decade. It will deliver decisive breakthroughs to secure American energy dominance, accelerate scientific discovery, and strengthen national security. “Throughout history, from the Manhattan Project to the Apollo mission, our nation’s brightest minds and industries have answered the call when their nation needed them,” said U.S. Secretary of Energy Chris Wright. “Today, the United States is calling on them once again. Under President Trump’s leadership, the Genesis Mission will unleash the full power of our National Laboratories, supercomputers, and data resources to ensure that America is the global leader in artificial intelligence and to usher in a new golden era of American discovery.” The announcement builds on President Trump’s Executive Order Removing Barriers to American Leadership In Artificial Intelligence and advances his America’s AI Action Plan released earlier this year—a directive to remove barriers to innovation, reduce dependence on foreign adversaries, and unleash the full strength of America’s scientific enterprise. Secretary Wright has designated Under Secretary for Science Darío Gil to lead the initiative. The Genesis Mission will mobilize the Department of Energy’s 17 National Laboratories, industry, and academia to build an integrated discovery platform. The platform will connect the world’s best supercomputers, AI systems, and next-generation quantum systems with the most advanced scientific instruments in the nation. Once complete, the platform will be the world’s most complex and powerful scientific instrument ever built. It will draw on the expertise of roughly 40,000 DOE scientists, engineers, and technical staff, alongside private sector innovators, to ensure that the United States leads and builds the technologies that will define the future. The Genesis Mission will focus on addressing three key challenges of national importance: American energy dominance : The Genesis Mission will accelerate advanced nuclear, fusion, and grid modernization using AI to provide affordable, reliable, and secure energy for Americans. Advancing discovery science : Through DOE’s investment and collaboration with industry, America is building the quantum ecosystem that will power discoveries—and industries—for decades to come. Ensuring national security : DOE will create advanced AI technologies for national security missions, deploy systems to ensure the safety and reliability of the U.S. nuclear stockpile, and accelerate the development of defense-ready materials. About Savannah River National Laboratory Savannah River National Laboratory is a multi-program federally funded research and development center managed and operated by Battelle Savannah River Alliance, LLC ( BSRA ), for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Environmental Management. ( www.srnl.gov ) Media contact: SRNL Media Relations « Previous Article Next Article » SRNL • Aiken • SC • 29808-0001 SRNL Operator: 803-725-6211 SRNL Information Line: 803-557-7765 Work With Us Academia Industry Partners Procurement Careers​ About Us Leadership Fact Sheets Emergency & Safety Information Disclaimer & Legal Information Follow Us SRNL Facebook Page SRNL Instagram Page SRNL X (Twitter) Page SRNL LinkedIn Page SRNL YouTube Page SRNL Flickr Page Learn about the Department of Energy’s Vulnerability Disclosure Program Accessibility & Section 508 Nondiscrimination & Section 1557 Savannah River National Laboratory is a multi-program Federally Funded Research and Development Center managed and operated by Battelle Savannah River Alliance, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Environmental Management. SRNL is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, or protected veteran status. SRNL is also committed to making our workplace accessible to individuals with disabilities and will provide reasonable accommodations, upon request, for individuals to participate in the application and hiring process. To request such an accommodation, you may contact us by e-mail at srnlrecruiting@srnl.gov. Research Areas Toggle child menu Expand Environmental Stewardship Toggle child menu Expand Nuclear Material Processing & Disposition Tank Waste Processing & Disposition Groundwater & Soil Remediation Toggle child menu Expand About ALTEMIS The ALTEMIS Approach Technology Transfer Applications & Expansion Links & Documents Staff & Contacts Network of National Laboratories for Environmental Management and Stewardship National Security Toggle child menu Expand Nuclear Materials Recovery Weapons Production Technology Plutonium Pit Production Program Nonproliferation Cyber Security & Threat Assessment Tritium Focus Group Emerging Science & Technology Toggle child menu Expand Genesis Mission Hydrogen Production & Storage Laboratory Directed Research & Development Partner With Us Toggle child menu Expand Academia Toggle child menu Expand Postdoctoral Opportunities Toggle child menu Expand Eisenhower Postdoctoral Research Fellowship Internships Joint Appointments Industry Partners Toggle child menu Expand Technologies & Licensing Technology Partnerships Technical Contacts Ombudsman Procurement Capabilities Toggle child menu Expand Advanced Manufacturing Collaborative Regulatory Center of Excellence Atmospheric Technologies Group Network of Analytical Laboratories Advanced Modeling & Simulation Mesoscale Transport & Flux Facility Newsroom Toggle child menu Expand News Releases Story Tips Our Stories Podcast Videos MATTER Magazine Fact Sheets About Us Toggle child menu Expand Why SRNL Our Leadership Community Involvement Conferences Toggle child menu Expand Actinide Separations Conference National Security Enterprise Careers Toggle child menu Expand Open Positions Internships & Research Programs Postdoctoral Opportunities Life at SRNL Connect With Us Search for: Search Toggle Menu Close Search for: Search 