 Genesis Mission - Savannah River National Laboratory Skip to content About Us Expand Why SRNL Our Leadership Community Involvement Conferences Expand Actinide Separations Conference National Security Enterprise Careers Expand Open Positions Internships & Research Programs Postdoctoral Opportunities Life at SRNL Connect With Us Research Areas Expand Environmental Stewardship Expand Nuclear Material Processing & Disposition Tank Waste Processing & Disposition Groundwater & Soil Remediation Expand About ALTEMIS The ALTEMIS Approach Technology Transfer Applications & Expansion Links & Documents Staff & Contacts Network of National Laboratories for Environmental Management and Stewardship National Security Expand Nuclear Materials Recovery Weapons Production Technology Plutonium Pit Production Program Nonproliferation Cyber Security & Threat Assessment Tritium Focus Group Emerging Science & Technology Expand Genesis Mission Hydrogen Production & Storage Laboratory Directed Research & Development Partner With Us Expand Academia Expand Postdoctoral Opportunities Expand Eisenhower Postdoctoral Research Fellowship Internships Joint Appointments Industry Partners Expand Technologies & Licensing Technology Partnerships Technical Contacts Ombudsman Procurement Capabilities Expand Advanced Manufacturing Collaborative Regulatory Center of Excellence Atmospheric Technologies Group Network of Analytical Laboratories Advanced Modeling & Simulation Mesoscale Transport & Flux Facility Newsroom Expand News Releases Story Tips Our Stories Podcast Videos MATTER Magazine Fact Sheets Search Toggle Menu Genesis Mission at SRNL Accelerating American Science Through AI Innovation Savannah River National Laboratory is proud to support the Department of Energy’s groundbreaking Genesis Mission , a national effort to harness the power of AI and advanced computing to revolutionize science and technology. Launched by Executive Order, the Genesis Mission is a nationwide effort to leverage advanced AI technologies to accelerate scientific breakthroughs, enhance national security, and advance energy innovation. The initiative seeks to build a unified platform that brings together resources, facilities, AI systems, and datasets across key scientific fields, with the goal of doubling the productivity and impact of U.S. research and innovation over the next decade. As one of 17 national laboratories mobilized for this historic endeavor, SRNL brings decades of expertise in nuclear materials management, environmental cleanup, national security, and advanced chemical processing to the Genesis Mission. SRNL researchers and their partners are committed to driving the development of AI models to accelerate research and development in key national mission areas. Genesis Mission exemplifies the spirit of discovery and collaboration that defines SRNL. Together, we are advancing the solutions that will define the next era of innovation. Featured Initiatives Environment Management Critical Materials & Materials to Unlock Supply (CM 2 US) Transformational AI Model Consortium AI for Nuclear Security Advancing Fusion Energy Systems Environment Management SRNL researchers are leading a collaborative effort to advance the Department of Energy’s mission to transform Nuclear Cleanup for Restoration and Revitalization (NR 2 ) through the application of AI. The initiative is supported by the DOE’s Network of National Laboratories for Environmental Management and Stewardship (NNLEMS). The DOE Office of Environmental Management faces an estimated $540 billion dollar liability spanning eight decades and involving processing of 90 million gallons of highly radioactive waste, 6.5 trillion liters of contaminated groundwater, and 40 million cubic meters of contaminated soil. To reduce cost, risk, and long-term liabilities associated with these challenges, SRNL is leading the development of DOE-EM’s AI Research and Development Roadmap, which seeks to guide AI investments across all mission areas at the 15 DOE-EM sites. Additionally, SRNL has been active in leading research and development efforts for environmental cleanup missions, through the use of integrated sensing technologies. As part of the Advanced Long-Term Environmental Monitoring Systems (ALTEMIS) program, the team developed end-to-end AI workflows for the design and optimization of sensor networks that predict the behavior and movement of contaminated groundwater plumes. This allows clean-up efforts to go from reactive to proactive resulting in significant cost savings. Coined AI Accelerated Strategies and Solutions in Environmental Technology, or AI-ASSET, the team seeks to transition the ALTEMIS approach to new sites and new systems in the coming year. Critical Materials & Materials to Unlock Supply (CM 2 US) SRNL is participating in the CM 2 US (Critical Minerals & Materials to Unlock Supply) initiative, a multi-national laboratory collaboration that uses artificial intelligence and advanced data platforms to accelerate discovery, processing, and deployment of critical minerals across the supply chain – from mining to manufacturing. Working with tech innovators at Silica X, Inc., SRNL is solving a key challenge: turning leftover materials of processes across the supply chain into valuable resources. Using an advanced AI tool called Wastepoint.AI, we will study the entire lifecycle of a critical material—from creation to reuse—and pinpoint practical ways to transform waste and byproducts into useful, saleable products to support supply chains and innovation. In 2026, the SRNL team will: Release an initial report displaying an AI that can suggest cost-saving methodologies and improve efficiency in the development and optimization of one or more critical material lifecycles. Analyze cutting-edge technologies to demonstrate how the AI platform bridges scientific expertise with real-world applications. Present a detailed report explaining how Wastepoint.AI outperforms traditional methods and what data are essential to adapt it for different material streams. This effort is a forward-thinking approach to reducing waste and creating opportunities in material production and reuse. Transformational AI Model Consortium SRNL is advancing the Genesis Mission’s Transformational AI Model Consortium (ModCon) through a focused effort to develop AI-ready data capabilities that enable next-generation scientific and operational models. Within the Genesis Mission, SRNL’s contribution centers on preparing, integrating, and governing high-value mission datasets so they can support the development and deployment of self-improving AI models. By leveraging DOE’s unique assets, research facilities and domain expertise, SRNL and its partners are working to ensure critical data are structured, curated, and accessible for advanced AI applications. These efforts will establish foundational data capabilities needed across multiple scientific and engineering domains, including core SRNL capabilities, such as environmental remediation, nuclear materials processing, energy systems, and national security missions. These efforts also will enable collaborative development of transformational AI models across the DOE enterprise. AI for Nuclear Security Additionally, SRNL is contributing to the Genesis Mission by applying AI and machine learning (AI/ML) technologies to optimize, enhance and potentially transform the future of National Nuclear Security Administration’s national security missions. For more than a decade, NNSA’s early investments in AI have helped to demonstrate prototype capabilities that will deepen scientific insights, accelerate design, manufacturing and engineering, and aid in the partial automation of time-consuming tasks across the nuclear security enterprise. In FY26, the Artificial Intelligence for Nuclear Security (AI4NS) sub-program of the NNSA’s Office of Advanced Simulation and Computing awarded ~$50M (21 projects) across 13 DOE labs, plants, and sites seeking to apply AI and/or ML capabilities to a narrowly focused set of national security mission targets. SRNL researchers are leading two of those projects: one targeting AI for Manufacturing and Qualification and the other targeting AI for Materials Discovery in collaboration with the Nevada National Security Sites (NNSS). Advancing Fusion Energy Systems SRNL is collaborating with other national laboratories as part of the American Science Cloud initiative to advance the development of fusion energy. The project aims to create a versatile digital platform that integrates real-time and simulated data to accelerate the design and deployment of Inertial Fusion Energy (IFE) systems, which will optimize the development and commercialization of future fusion power plants. One of the key elements of IFE systems is the hydrogen isotope tritium. SRNL is leveraging its unparalleled expertise in tritium science to generate high-quality datasets and build AI-driven models to simulate tritium flow, storage, and recycling. In partnership with Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, SRNL is using these datasets to develop and validate ML models that ensure tritium handling is efficient and meets regulatory standards. By contributing advanced tritium models and technical expertise, SRNL is playing a vital role in enabling rapid innovation and deployment of fusion energy technologies. Advanced Manufacturing Collaborative SRNL’s Advanced Manufacturing Collaborative (AMC) represents a bold step forward in bringing together the best of American industry, academia, and government to solve our nation’s most pressing energy and security challenges. View the AMC Fact Sheet The Genesis Mission The Genesis Mission unites DOE National Labs, industry, academia, and more to harness AI for breakthroughs in energy dominance, discovery science, and national security. Energy Department launches ‘Genesis Mission’ to transform American science and innovation through the AI computing revolution SRNL proudly joins the DOE’s Genesis Mission to advance AI, enhancing America’s energy resilience. SRNL Pioneers the Next Generation of Computing SRNL is making advances in quantum computing, integrating it with artificial intelligence, and training a specialized workforce to solve complex problems across various fields. SRNL’s ALTEMIS Sensors Make International Impact at Sellafield The ALTEMIS project funded by the DOE – Environmental Management is an ongoing effort at SRNL with the goal of improving the monitoring of groundwater contaminant plumes. Read More Articles SRNL • Aiken • SC • 29808-0001 SRNL Operator: 803-725-6211 SRNL Information Line: 803-557-7765 Work With Us Academia Industry Partners Procurement Careers​ About Us Leadership Fact Sheets Emergency & Safety Information Disclaimer & Legal Information Follow Us SRNL Facebook Page SRNL Instagram Page SRNL X (Twitter) Page SRNL LinkedIn Page SRNL YouTube Page SRNL Flickr Page Learn about the Department of Energy’s Vulnerability Disclosure Program Accessibility & Section 508 Nondiscrimination & Section 1557 Savannah River National Laboratory is a multi-program Federally Funded Research and Development Center managed and operated by Battelle Savannah River Alliance, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Environmental Management. SRNL is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, or protected veteran status. SRNL is also committed to making our workplace accessible to individuals with disabilities and will provide reasonable accommodations, upon request, for individuals to participate in the application and hiring process. To request such an accommodation, you may contact us by e-mail at srnlrecruiting@srnl.gov. Research Areas Toggle child menu Expand Environmental Stewardship Toggle child menu Expand Nuclear Material Processing & Disposition Tank Waste Processing & Disposition Groundwater & Soil Remediation Toggle child menu Expand About ALTEMIS The ALTEMIS Approach Technology Transfer Applications & Expansion Links & Documents Staff & Contacts Network of National Laboratories for Environmental Management and Stewardship National Security Toggle child menu Expand Nuclear Materials Recovery Weapons Production Technology Plutonium Pit Production Program Nonproliferation Cyber Security & Threat Assessment Tritium Focus Group Emerging Science & Technology Toggle child menu Expand Genesis Mission Hydrogen Production & Storage Laboratory Directed Research & Development Partner With Us Toggle child menu Expand Academia Toggle child menu Expand Postdoctoral Opportunities Toggle child menu Expand Eisenhower Postdoctoral Research Fellowship Internships Joint Appointments Industry Partners Toggle child menu Expand Technologies & Licensing Technology Partnerships Technical Contacts Ombudsman Procurement Capabilities Toggle child menu Expand Advanced Manufacturing Collaborative Regulatory Center of Excellence Atmospheric Technologies Group Network of Analytical Laboratories Advanced Modeling & Simulation Mesoscale Transport & Flux Facility Newsroom Toggle child menu Expand News Releases Story Tips Our Stories Podcast Videos MATTER Magazine Fact Sheets About Us Toggle child menu Expand Why SRNL Our Leadership Community Involvement Conferences Toggle child menu Expand Actinide Separations Conference National Security Enterprise Careers Toggle child menu Expand Open Positions Internships & Research Programs Postdoctoral Opportunities Life at SRNL Connect With Us Search for: Search Toggle Menu Close Search for: Search 