 SLAC to lead Genesis Mission AI project to recover critical metals from lithium-ion battery waste Skip to main content SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory About About Learn about our science, people, facilities and partners. Discover our history and vision for the future. OUR STORY Mission, vision, values History LAB OVERVIEW SLAC at a glance Lab organization Our partnerships OUR PEOPLE Leadership Meet our teams Faculty VISIT SLAC Public tours Contact us Resources Images, videos & more Brochures & fact sheets Connect With Us Facebook Flickr Instagram LinkedIn Twitter YouTube video Who we are We explore radically new ideas with an entrepreneurial mindset. Research Research Get an overview of research at SLAC: X-ray and ultrafast science, particle and astrophysics, cosmology, particle accelerators, biology, energy and technology. X-ray & ultrafast science Revealing nature’s fastest processes with X-rays, lasers and electrons Physics of the universe Studying the particles and forces that knit the cosmos together Advanced accelerators Building smaller, faster, more powerful accelerators for all Science of life Understanding the machinery of life at its most basic level New technologies Inventing new tools for science and society Energy sciences Breaking new ground in securing abundant, affordable and reliable energy. Spotlight SLAC science explained Cut through the jargon while exploring our research. Facilities & Centers Facilities & Centers Learn more about the places where science happens at SLAC: our major facilities, institutes and centers. SCIENTIFIC FACILITIES LCLS website Linac Coherent Light Source SSRL website Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource FACET-II website Facility for Advanced Accelerator Experimental Tests CryoEM website Cryogenic Electron Microscopy JOINT INSTITUTES & CENTERS SIMES website Stanford Institute for Materials & Energy Science KIPAC website Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics & Cosmology PULSE website Stanford PULSE Institute SUNCAT website Center for Interface Science & Catalysis SLAC-Stanford Battery Center NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory LSST SLAC & Stanford build the world’s largest digital camera for the Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST). Work with Us Work with Us Find a career, partner with us or apply to use our tools and facilities. PARTNER WITH US For industry partners Research partnerships & tech transfer Technology Innovation CAREERS AT SLAC Job openings Internships Life at SLAC USE OUR FACILITIES Apply to become a user of our scientific research facilities and instruments. COMING TO SLAC BECOME A SUPPLIER Careers at SLAC Join our united workforce. News & Events News & Events Get the latest news about the lab, our science and discoveries. Explore SLAC events and learn how to participate. NEWS CENTER News archive Media resources Images & videos SLAC EVENTS Public lectures Scientific seminars Community events SYMMETRY MAGAZINE This joint publication of SLAC and Fermilab is your view into the world of particle physics. EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS Educational tours Resources for students & educators Connect With Us Facebook Flickr Instagram LinkedIn Twitter YouTube Upcoming STEM Community Day 2026 Saturday, September 12 Search Search Filter search by Search site Search people Submit Staff portal Stanford directory Coming to SLAC Resources for… Researchers at SLAC and USC will use AI agents to develop pathways for separating out metals like cobalt, nickel and manganese, testing new approaches and learning from experiments. (Greg Stewart/SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory) Home News and events News center … Facebook Share LinkedIn Share Email Send July 22, 2026 SLAC to lead Genesis Mission AI project to recover critical metals from lithium-ion battery waste Researchers from the SLAC-Stanford Battery Center join the University of Southern California in a project announced today by the DOE to help secure the U.S. supply of critical minerals. By Angela Anderson Subscribe to SLAC Breaking News SLAC will lead a Genesis Mission project focused on optimizing extraction of metals from spent lithium-ion batteries. The project is part of a national Department of Energy effort to secure the U.S. supply of critical minerals. The lab will partner in 10 additional projects announced today at the Genesis Mission Summit. The U.S. Department of Energy’s SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory will lead a Genesis Mission project to help secure the nation’s critical mineral supply by developing AI tools to improve recovery of valuable transition metals from spent lithium-ion batteries. The project, a collaboration between researchers at the SLAC-Stanford Battery Center and the University of Southern California, will address a key national science and technology challenge set out by the DOE earlier this year. In addition, SLAC will partner with other national labs, universities and industry leaders on 10 Genesis Mission projects announced today at the Genesis Mission Summit in Washington, D.C. The Genesis Mission is a historic national initiative led by the DOE, which is building the world’s most powerful integrated science discovery platform. By uniting government, industry, academia, and philanthropy, it is accelerating breakthroughs in energy, scientific discovery, and national security through a new platform that combines AI, supercomputing, quantum systems, and advanced scientific instruments. The funding awards announced at the summit represent the first of two phases of awards from the Genesis Mission: Transforming Science and Energy with AI Request for Application ( RFA ). The goal of the Phase I RFA awards is to identify promising pathways toward transformative scientific capabilities and establish a foundation for future investment and scale. Project teams will design and demonstrate research workflows that integrate AI with scientific investigation, while rigorously evaluating whether those approaches can accelerate discovery, improve predictive capabilities, enhance experimentation, or generate new scientific insights. Building a team of AI agents to improve metal purity The SLAC-led project, “A Multi-agent AI Framework for Discovering Chemical Drivers of Selective Critical Metal Recovery from Complex Battery Waste,” focuses on improving recovery of metals such as cobalt, nickel and manganese from lithium-ion batteries that have reached the end of their useful life. A single spent electric vehicle battery holds tens of pounds of such valuable metals, and recovering them could provide a domestic supply of materials, reducing today’s imports. But extracting these metals currently requires large amounts of chemicals, generates significant waste, and involves extensive trial and error. The SLAC-led project will assemble multiple AI agents, each with a specialized role, to evaluate strategies across diverse fields, ranging from biochemistry to geology, to propose specific pathways for separating out the metals, testing new approaches and learning from experiments. “Over nine months, SLAC and the University of Southern California will run several AI-experiment cycles, aiming to recover target metals at 80 percent purity or better, while bench-marking this approach against conventional literature search and recovery methods,” Ahamed Irshad Maniyanganam, SLAC associate scientist and lead researcher on the project, said. Coinvestigators on the project include Frank Abild-Pedersen, SLAC senior scientist and co-director of the SLAC-Stanford SUNCAT Center for Interface Science and Catalysis, Jagjit Nanda, distinguished scientist and executive director of the SLAC-Stanford Battery Center, and Jayakanth Ravichandran, professor at the USC Viterbi School of Engineering. In addition to the metals recovery project, SLAC will contribute to 10 additional Genesis Mission Phase I projects in areas including biotechnology, fusion energy, electronics and sensors, cosmology, particle physics, and accelerator technology. SLAC’s premier facilities produce vast and uniquely varied scientific datasets that illuminate our world from the grand scale of the cosmos to the smallest scales of the motions of electrons. These data – along with the SLAC-Stanford ecosystem’s expertise in algorithm development and its world-leading domain scientists – will fuel the AI revolution in science. The lab’s contributions to the Genesis Mission bring together advanced computing infrastructure, AI innovation and data from world-leading scientific facilities to power the next generation of discovery. “SLAC’s role as a leading collaborator across a range of technologies positions us to advance AI’s transformative role in scientific discovery,” said SLAC Lab Director John Sarrao. “We appreciate the commitment of the Department of Energy in addressing these national challenges.” For media inquiries, please contact media@slac.stanford.edu . For other questions or comments, contact SLAC Strategic Communications & External Affairs at communications@slac.stanford.edu . About SLAC SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory explores how the universe works at the biggest, smallest and fastest scales and invents powerful tools used by researchers around the globe. As world leaders in ultrafast science and bold explorers of the physics of the universe, we forge new ground in understanding our origins and building a healthier and more sustainable future. Our discovery and innovation help develop new materials and chemical processes and open unprecedented views of the cosmos and life’s most delicate machinery. Building on more than 60 years of visionary research, we help shape the future by advancing areas such as quantum technology, scientific computing and the development of next-generation accelerators. SLAC is operated by Stanford University for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science . The Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. Related topics Energy sciences Applied energy SLAC-Stanford Battery Center Partnerships DOE partnerships SLAC+Stanford Science news AI and machine learning Batteries Dig Deeper Related stories News Brief To make computers more energy efficient, SLAC researchers follow the heat A SLAC-Stanford team developed a new way to precisely measure just how much energy has dissipated into heat in an electrical system – and... September 8, 2026 · 5 min read News Brief Giving solid-state batteries a squeeze keeps them from short-circuiting SLAC and Stanford researchers found that compressing solid-state battery material reduced the formation of lithium-filled cracks called dendrites, leading to faster charging and longer... August 28, 2026 · 5 min read News Brief SLAC researchers uncover copper's surprising melting behavior at extreme temperatures Finding provides insights into design for heat-resistant fusion chamber. August 13, 2026 · 5 min read News Brief To make computers more energy efficient, SLAC researchers follow the heat A SLAC-Stanford team developed a new way to precisely measure just how much energy has dissipated into heat in an electrical system – and... September 8, 2026 · 5 min read News Brief Giving solid-state batteries a squeeze keeps them from short-circuiting SLAC and Stanford researchers found that compressing solid-state battery material reduced the formation of lithium-filled cracks called dendrites, leading to faster charging and longer... August 28, 2026 · 5 min read News Brief SLAC researchers uncover copper's surprising melting behavior at extreme temperatures Finding provides insights into design for heat-resistant fusion chamber. August 13, 2026 · 5 min read News Brief For AI to drive science discoveries, highly reproducible data is key In a SLAC-led study, four laboratories collaborated to ensure reproducibility in AI training data to predict new catalysts for future fuel production. August 3, 2026 · 3 min read News Brief SLAC researchers ‘watch’ molecules steered by laser light Using the powerful LCLS X-ray laser, researchers at SLAC have directly imaged for the first time how molecules rearrange during a chemical reaction controlled... June 24, 2026 · 3 min read Feature SLAC’s premier facilities and record-setting datasets fuel DOE Genesis Mission The lab’s contributions to the national AI initiative are bolstered by its breakthrough scientific tools, unprecedented data and unique partnerships that help illuminate nature... June 16, 2026 · 14 min read Show less Show more SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory 2575 Sand Hill Road Menlo Park, CA 94025-7015 650.926.3300 Coming to SLAC Connect with us Contact us Facebook Flickr Instagram LinkedIn Twitter YouTube Sign up for our email Monthly newsletter for cutting-edge science, SLAC milestones and events. Sign up Bold People Visionary Science Real Impact We explore how the universe works at the biggest, smallest and fastest scales and invent powerful tools used by scientists around the globe. About Our story Our people Lab overview Visit SLAC Resources Connect with us Research X-ray & ultrafast science Advanced accelerators New technologies Physics of the universe Science of life SLAC science explained Facilities & centers Scientific facilities Joint institutes & centers Work with us Partner with us Become a supplier Use our facilities Careers at SLAC News & events News center Symmetry Magazine Media resources Events Educational programs Connect with us Staff portal Privacy policy Accessibility Vulnerability disclosure A–Z index Website feedback SLAC home Maps & directions Emergency info Careers © 2026 SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory is operated by Stanford University for the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science. Top Top Back to top Back to top 