 The Genesis Mission @ Jefferson Lab | Jefferson Lab Skip to main content User menu Log in Jefferson Lab Menu About Science Careers Home Main Search Search Menu Close Jefferson Lab Mobile Menu About Science Careers Resources Home Search Overview Mega - Overview Lab Overview Fact Sheets Visiting Contact Press Room Making an Impact Research Highlights Organization Mega - About Organization Laboratory Director Leadership Team Divisions and Departments Organization Charts Contact Jefferson Lab Lab Vision Mega - About Lab Vision Mission Campus Plan History Mega - About History Lab Timeline Historical Archive Reporting Mega - About Reporting DOE Report Card Public Reading Room Prime Contract Science Mega - Science Menu Our Science Research Highlights Electron-Ion Collider Generic EIC-related Detector R&D Program High Performance Data Facility Laboratory Directed Research and Development Program Research Mega - Research Nuclear Physics Accelerator Science Theory Center Experiment Research Experimental Schedule Publications Research Highlights Research Archive Physics Mega - Physics Nuclear Physics Seminars and Colloquia Current Experiments Recent Results Experiment Schedule Experiment Archive Jefferson Lab Users Group Technical Support Groups Physics Administration User Registration Theory Mega - Theory Theory Center People Research Seminars Staff Presentations Outreach Recent Theory Publications Contact The Theory Center Accelerator Mega - Accelerator Accelerator Science Accelerator Leadership Accelerator Operations CASA CIS Engineering Systems SRF Institute LERF UITF Accelerator Seminars Research and Technology Partnerships Human Resources Mega - Careers Menu 1 Careers at Jefferson Lab International Services Holiday Calendar INSIGHT for Employees Contact Jefferson Lab Why choose us Mega - Careers Menu 2 About JLab Groundbreaking Science Innovative Technology Dynamic Workforce Flexible Schedule Great Benefits Life at jefferson lab Mega - Careers Menu 3 Visiting Jefferson Lab STEM Events Open House Event Services Calendar of Events For The Public For The Public About Jefferson Lab Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI&ML) Electron-Ion Collider High Performance Data Facility Job Openings Press Room Research Highlights Visiting For Researchers For Researchers For Researchers Accelerator Science EIC Center EIC@JLab Engineering Nuclear Physics Publications Theory Center User Information For Education For Education For STEM Postdoc/Grad Students Program & Events Science Cinema Student Affairs Teacher Tools For Business For Business Business Community Impact Emergency Preparedness Event Services Partnerships Phone Book Procurement Small Business Program Technology Transfer Quick Links Mega - Top menu A-Z Index Sign In Artificial Intelligence Artificial Intelligence News & Events Contact Us Internal JLab AI Resources Research Links Nuclear Physics Accelerator Science Theory Center Experiment Research Experimental Schedule Publications Research Highlights Research Archive AI @ JLab AI Home The Genesis Mission @ Jefferson Lab Jefferson Lab has joined with the U.S. Department of Energy and its sister national labs in the DOE complex to support The Genesis Mission. This nationwide endeavor aims to establish U.S. dominance in AI science and applications and serve as a shining example of our nation's ability to lead the world in advancing gold-standard scientific applications. Genesis Mission 2026 Phase I RFA Grants The goal of the Phase I RFA awards is to identify promising pathways toward transformative scientific capabilities and establish a foundation for future investment and scale. Project teams will design and demonstrate research workflows that integrate AI with scientific investigation, while rigorously evaluating whether those approaches can accelerate discovery, improve predictive capabilities, enhance experimentation, or generate new scientific insights. Check out the seven projects on which Jefferson Lab is a partner. Advancing the High Performance Data Facility Led by Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, in partnership with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, the High Performance Data Facility is currently under development. It will be an interconnected, distributed data platform designed to enable researchers to seamlessly access, integrate, and share data assets from the U.S. Department of Energy’s unique scientific instruments, computational facilities, and data repositories across the national labs. Building the American Science Cloud The American Science Cloud (AmSC) will use cloud computing infrastructure to integrate U.S. government, academic and private-sector programs. Jefferson Lab is leading several of these projects to provide first proof-of-concept approaches to realizing AI's potential in streamlining aspects of scientific research, freeing up scientists to focus more on their data and analyses and less on tasks that computers can handle more efficiently. Collaborating in Seed Model Teams Jefferson Lab is currently involved in seed model teams, including Quarks to Cosmos and Multi-Office Accelerator Operations & Controls (MOAT), that feature science and/or technologies that are key efforts at the lab. Connecting Science with AI Partnerships that align DOE’s scientific enterprise with leading advances in AI are critical toward advancing the technologies to benefit science. Key challenges are being addressed by a multi-laboratory collaboration led by Argonne National Laboratory. Jefferson Lab contributes to this effort with leadership in data governance, unique expertise in data stewardship and knowledge of nuclear physics data and analysis workflows. Jefferson Lab is also working to connect unique scientific and instrument data with AI technologies. DOE: The Genesis Mission The Genesis Mission is a first-of-its-kind initiative aimed at benefiting the nation by significantly advancing the speed and efficiency of discovery science and contributing to the DOE goals of energy dominance and agile deterrence. Learn more about the The Genesis Mission here. Genesis Mission 2026 Phase I RFA Grants The goal of the Phase I RFA awards is to identify promising pathways toward transformative scientific capabilities and establish a foundation for future investment and scale. Project teams will design and demonstrate research workflows that integrate AI with scientific investigation, while rigorously evaluating whether those approaches can accelerate discovery, improve predictive capabilities, enhance experimentation, or generate new scientific insights. Check out the seven projects on which Jefferson Lab is a partner. Advancing the High Performance Data Facility Led by Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, in partnership with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, the High Performance Data Facility is currently under development. It will be an interconnected, distributed data platform designed to enable researchers to seamlessly access, integrate, and share data assets from the U.S. Department of Energy’s unique scientific instruments, computational facilities, and data repositories across the national labs. Building the American Science Cloud The American Science Cloud (AmSC) will use cloud computing infrastructure to integrate U.S. government, academic and private-sector programs. Jefferson Lab is leading several of these projects to provide first proof-of-concept approaches to realizing AI's potential in streamlining aspects of scientific research, freeing up scientists to focus more on their data and analyses and less on tasks that computers can handle more efficiently. Collaborating in Seed Model Teams Jefferson Lab is currently involved in seed model teams, including Quarks to Cosmos and Multi-Office Accelerator Operations & Controls (MOAT), that feature science and/or technologies that are key efforts at the lab. Connecting Science with AI Partnerships that align DOE’s scientific enterprise with leading advances in AI are critical toward advancing the technologies to benefit science. Key challenges are being addressed by a multi-laboratory collaboration led by Argonne National Laboratory. Jefferson Lab contributes to this effort with leadership in data governance, unique expertise in data stewardship and knowledge of nuclear physics data and analysis workflows. Jefferson Lab is also working to connect unique scientific and instrument data with AI technologies. DOE: The Genesis Mission The Genesis Mission is a first-of-its-kind initiative aimed at benefiting the nation by significantly advancing the speed and efficiency of discovery science and contributing to the DOE goals of energy dominance and agile deterrence. Learn more about the The Genesis Mission here. facebook linkedin instagram twitter youtube flickr For The Public About Jefferson Lab Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI&ML) Electron-Ion Collider High Performance Data Facility Job Openings Press Room Research Highlights Visiting For Researchers For Researchers Accelerator Science EIC Center EIC@JLab Engineering Nuclear Physics Publications Theory Center User Information For Education For STEM Postdoc/Grad Students Program & Events Science Cinema Student Affairs Teacher Tools For Business Business Community Impact Emergency Preparedness Event Services Partnerships Phone Book Procurement Small Business Program Technology Transfer Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility 12000 Jefferson Avenue, Newport News, VA Phone: 757-269-7100 Fax: 757-269-7363 Footer menu right 1 INSIGHT for employees Privacy and Security Notice Vulnerability Disclosure Program Accessibility Standard Statement Footer menu right 2 Contact Jefferson Lab Jefferson Lab Status Report a problem Site Map Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility is managed by SURATech, LLC , for the U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Science. for the U.S. Department of Energy. 