 American Science Cloud & JLab | Jefferson Lab Skip to main content User menu Log in Jefferson Lab Menu About Science Careers Home Main Search Search Menu Close Jefferson Lab Mobile Menu About Science Careers Resources Home Search Overview Mega - Overview Lab Overview Fact Sheets Visiting Contact Press Room Making an Impact Research Highlights Organization Mega - About Organization Laboratory Director Leadership Team Divisions and Departments Organization Charts Contact Jefferson Lab Lab Vision Mega - About Lab Vision Mission Campus Plan History Mega - About History Lab Timeline Historical Archive Reporting Mega - About Reporting DOE Report Card Public Reading Room Prime Contract Science Mega - Science Menu Our Science Research Highlights Electron-Ion Collider Generic EIC-related Detector R&D Program High Performance Data Facility Laboratory Directed Research and Development Program Research Mega - Research Nuclear Physics Accelerator Science Theory Center Experiment Research Experimental Schedule Publications Research Highlights Research Archive Physics Mega - Physics Nuclear Physics Seminars and Colloquia Current Experiments Recent Results Experiment Schedule Experiment Archive Jefferson Lab Users Group Technical Support Groups Physics Administration User Registration Theory Mega - Theory Theory Center People Research Seminars Staff Presentations Outreach Recent Theory Publications Contact The Theory Center Accelerator Mega - Accelerator Accelerator Science Accelerator Leadership Accelerator Operations CASA CIS Engineering Systems SRF Institute LERF UITF Accelerator Seminars Research and Technology Partnerships Human Resources Mega - Careers Menu 1 Careers at Jefferson Lab International Services Holiday Calendar INSIGHT for Employees Contact Jefferson Lab Why choose us Mega - Careers Menu 2 About JLab Groundbreaking Science Innovative Technology Dynamic Workforce Flexible Schedule Great Benefits Life at jefferson lab Mega - Careers Menu 3 Visiting Jefferson Lab STEM Events Open House Event Services Calendar of Events For The Public For The Public About Jefferson Lab Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI&ML) Electron-Ion Collider High Performance Data Facility Job Openings Press Room Research Highlights Visiting For Researchers For Researchers For Researchers Accelerator Science EIC Center EIC@JLab Engineering Nuclear Physics Publications Theory Center User Information For Education For Education For STEM Postdoc/Grad Students Program & Events Science Cinema Student Affairs Teacher Tools For Business For Business Business Community Impact Emergency Preparedness Event Services Partnerships Phone Book Procurement Small Business Program Technology Transfer Quick Links Mega - Top menu A-Z Index Sign In Artificial Intelligence Artificial Intelligence News & Events Contact Us Internal JLab AI Resources Research Links Nuclear Physics Accelerator Science Theory Center Experiment Research Experimental Schedule Publications Research Highlights Research Archive AI @ JLab Genesis Mission American Science Cloud & JLab The American Science Cloud (AmSC) will use cloud computing infrastructure along with modern and next-generation computational tools to integrate U.S. government, academic and private-sector programs. The AmSC will serve as the enabling software and hardware infrastructure for DOE’s AI data and model development efforts in furtherance of the DOE mission. FemtoMind: Foundational Infrastructure for QCD Science The FemtoMind team specializes in Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) research. QCD is the theory that addresses the smallest bits of matter and forces that build our visible universe. This project brings together nuclear physicists who are experts in the tools of exploring QCD, such as lattice QCD (LQCD), perturbative QCD calculations, global analysis, and AI/ML-based inference pipelines. Hardware-accelerated AI-based Distributed Inverse Solver (HAIDIS) The core of HAIDIS is the physics-inspired Scalable Asynchronous Generative Inverse-Problem Solver (SAGIPS), an advanced framework that uses Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) - a type of an AI model, to extract hidden information from large volume experimental datasets. Once the GAN has been successfully trained, its generator is able to produce distributions of unknown quantities with basically infinite precision. Scientific User Facilities Infrastructure Partnership The DOE Office of Science Scientific User Facilities (SUFs) rank among the crown jewels of American science, contributing significantly as well to national economic competitiveness. Together, they represent tens of thousands of facility users, researchers, and engineers, and decades of achievement and experience with unique scientific instruments, some among the world’s largest and most complex. The SUFs provide dedicated computing, data, and networking infrastructure, and collaborate with ASCR resource providers in many mutually beneficial ways. This proposal aims to continue and enhance established relationships in the context of the American Science Cloud (AmSC) as a critical, transformative driver of scientific progress. The main goal of the project is to take key initial steps toward fully leveraging and integrating AmSC infrastructure and capabilities with complementary services and infrastructure at the SUFs to support early AmSC-driven activities. Advancing the High Performance Data Facility Also as part of the American Science Cloud, work will continue on the High Performance Data Facility. Led by Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, in partnership with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, the High Performance Data Facility is currently under development. It will be an interconnected, distributed data platform designed to enable researchers to seamlessly access, integrate, and share data assets from the U.S. Department of Energy’s unique scientific instruments, computational facilities, and data repositories across the national labs. FemtoMind: Foundational Infrastructure for QCD Science The FemtoMind team specializes in Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) research. QCD is the theory that addresses the smallest bits of matter and forces that build our visible universe. This project brings together nuclear physicists who are experts in the tools of exploring QCD, such as lattice QCD (LQCD), perturbative QCD calculations, global analysis, and AI/ML-based inference pipelines. Hardware-accelerated AI-based Distributed Inverse Solver (HAIDIS) The core of HAIDIS is the physics-inspired Scalable Asynchronous Generative Inverse-Problem Solver (SAGIPS), an advanced framework that uses Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) - a type of an AI model, to extract hidden information from large volume experimental datasets. Once the GAN has been successfully trained, its generator is able to produce distributions of unknown quantities with basically infinite precision. Scientific User Facilities Infrastructure Partnership The DOE Office of Science Scientific User Facilities (SUFs) rank among the crown jewels of American science, contributing significantly as well to national economic competitiveness. Together, they represent tens of thousands of facility users, researchers, and engineers, and decades of achievement and experience with unique scientific instruments, some among the world’s largest and most complex. The SUFs provide dedicated computing, data, and networking infrastructure, and collaborate with ASCR resource providers in many mutually beneficial ways. This proposal aims to continue and enhance established relationships in the context of the American Science Cloud (AmSC) as a critical, transformative driver of scientific progress. The main goal of the project is to take key initial steps toward fully leveraging and integrating AmSC infrastructure and capabilities with complementary services and infrastructure at the SUFs to support early AmSC-driven activities. Advancing the High Performance Data Facility Also as part of the American Science Cloud, work will continue on the High Performance Data Facility. Led by Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, in partnership with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, the High Performance Data Facility is currently under development. It will be an interconnected, distributed data platform designed to enable researchers to seamlessly access, integrate, and share data assets from the U.S. Department of Energy’s unique scientific instruments, computational facilities, and data repositories across the national labs. facebook linkedin instagram twitter youtube flickr For The Public About Jefferson Lab Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI&ML) Electron-Ion Collider High Performance Data Facility Job Openings Press Room Research Highlights Visiting For Researchers For Researchers Accelerator Science EIC Center EIC@JLab Engineering Nuclear Physics Publications Theory Center User Information For Education For STEM Postdoc/Grad Students Program & Events Science Cinema Student Affairs Teacher Tools For Business Business Community Impact Emergency Preparedness Event Services Partnerships Phone Book Procurement Small Business Program Technology Transfer Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility 12000 Jefferson Avenue, Newport News, VA Phone: 757-269-7100 Fax: 757-269-7363 Footer menu right 1 INSIGHT for employees Privacy and Security Notice Vulnerability Disclosure Program Accessibility Standard Statement Footer menu right 2 Contact Jefferson Lab Jefferson Lab Status Report a problem Site Map Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility is managed by SURATech, LLC , for the U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Science. for the U.S. Department of Energy. 