 Home | High Performance Data Facility Hub Skip to main content Main menu Home News JLDC Engagements About Contact & Careers High Performance Data Facility: Supporting the Data Life Cycle OUR MISSION: To enable and accelerate scientific discovery by delivering data services at the scale necessary to optimize the use of scientific data as valued asset by the nation's research communities. HPDF will become the long-term home of Genesis Mission data services — integrating data sources, repositories, and processing into a multi-facility AI powerhouse. Top Banner A Focus on Stewardship Advancing Discovery and Innovation HPDF will lead the stewardship of the scientific data life cycle, supporting DOE's commitment to findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable data principles. A Focus on Science Supporting Next-Generation Discoveries HPDF will enable and accelerate scientific discovery by delivering state-of-the-art data services. The project will provide critical science and research resources to the nation's experimental facilities. A Focus on Community Providing Reliable, Accessible Resources HPDF will deliver a hybrid infrastructure of cloud resources and on-site hardware to provide a robust, trusted platform for community data services. Using artificial intelligence and machine learning, the facility will combine a catalog of raw research results with the necessary resources to deliver AI-ready data and enable scientific discovery. A Focus on Integration Delivering Seamless, Secure Interoperability HPDF will provide unique and enhanced capabilities tailored to the needs of data-intensive science. The project will be designed to connect scientific users in the DOE computing and data infrastructure ecosystem. HPDF Partnership Builds a Vision for the AI Era Leading-edge science demands integration, and the U.S. Department of Energy’s science programs increasingly require advanced computation, data solutions, and networking. The High Performance Data Facility, a first-of-its-kind project, is envisioned as a state-of-the-art resource for data science and research. From coast to coast, Jefferson Lab in Virginia and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California will provide seamless services that enable scientific advancement through an integrated model. As a distributed facility across multiple sites, HPDF will achieve higher availability and reliability than a single site could. Additionally, the mix of resources at any site can vary to match specific local needs. Data is the fuel of the AI revolution of the 21st century and the most valuable resource in the AI era. AI-driven science requires production-quality data services, a capability that does not exist today at the needed scale. HPDF will provide that capability. HPDF will be a unique data-first facility that treats data as a first-class asset and provides the capabilities needed to extract maximum scientific value. #core a { text-decoration: none; text-shaxdow: 2px 2px black; color: white; } HPDF Leadership Team Amber Boehnlein PI, Project Director amber@jlab.org Lavanya Ramakrishnan Deputy Project Director lramakrishnan@lbl.gov Graham Heyes Technical Director heyes@jlab.org Theresa Bamrick Project Manager theresa@jlab.org National and global leadership in scientific data life cycle management and stewardship High Performance Data Facility Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility 12000 Jefferson Avenue, Newport News, VA Footer links 1 Jefferson Lab Team Login Footer links 2 Berkeley Lab 