 About AI Tennessee - AI Tennessee Skip to content Home About About AI Tennessee Core Team Work With Us AI Research Collaboration Collaboration AI TechX Resources Request a Speaker News News Events Home About About AI Tennessee Core Team Work With Us AI Research Collaboration Collaboration AI TechX Resources Request a Speaker News News Events Home About About AI Tennessee Core Team Work With Us AI Research Collaboration Collaboration AI TechX Resources Request a Speaker News News Events Home About About AI Tennessee Core Team Work With Us AI Research Collaboration Collaboration AI TechX Resources Request a Speaker News News Events About AI Tennessee Who We Are AI Tennessee is a statewide initiative led by the University of Tennessee and promotes the state’s unique strengths and opportunities in artificial intelligence. What makes Tennessee an AI hub? By fostering collaboration between higher education, K-12, industry, and government, we are elevating AI advancement to help our economy and communities thrive. The State of Tennessee has been deliberate, proactive, and exceptionally well-prepared for America’s AI workforce transition, with assets few states can rival. Our universities house unparalleled research expertise, state-of-the-art facilities, and a wealth of talent available to meet the demand of high-impact positions in AI research, jobs, and internships. Energy infrastructure is critical to fuel AI and Tennessee is home to the Tennessee Valley Authority, the nation’s largest public power provider that is leading the country through a nuclear renaissance. Anchored by Oak Ridge National Laboratory, the country’s largest science and energy laboratory, and the Genesis Mission, Tennessee is positioning itself as a global leader in AI-driven scientific discovery. Together, these assets create a unique innovation and energy ecosystem. The Tennessee AI Advisory Council offers essential, strategic governmental leadership to advance the state’s use of AI technologies in a manner beneficial for all Tennesseans. Combined with Tennessee’s strengths in manufacturing, logistics, energy, healthcare, and supply chain, the state offers a nationally scalable model for responsible AI development and deployment. AI Tennessee Timeline 2022 The AI Tennessee initiative is officially established with a shared vision for applied AI leadership. 2023 Cross-sector strategic visioning begins with Tennessee’s major industries and university partners; AI Tennessee awards its first seed grants. 2024 AI Tennessee expands its statewide institutional collaborations; The Special Competitive Studies Project (SCSP) convenes in Knoxville and Oak Ridge. 2025 AI Tennessee launches its industry consortium AI TechX; AI Tennessee launches its own office of Research & Development; the State of Tennessee AI Advisory Council is briefed on AI Tennessee’s work; AI CORE Conference co-hosted with Oak Ridge National Lab and Vanderbilt University. 2026 The inaugural AI Tennessee Summit draws 500+ cross-sector leaders to Nashville; AI Tennessee launches the office of AI Enablement. Linkedin Envelope Home About About AI Tennessee Core Team Work With Us AI Research Collaboration Collaboration AI TechX Resources Request a Speaker News News Events Home About About AI Tennessee Core Team Work With Us AI Research Collaboration Collaboration AI TechX Resources Request a Speaker News News Events Search 