 Brown’s National Labs Day spotlights collaboration in AI-enabled science | Brown University Skip to Main Content Brown University News from Brown Site Navigation Featured Events For Journalists Search Menu Topics News and Events Date May 15, 2026 2026-05-15 Media Contact Kevin Stacey [email protected] 401-447-3800 All News Share Facebook Twitter_X Linkedin Email Brown’s National Labs Day spotlights collaboration in AI-enabled science A daylong conference brought scientists from the Department of Energy’s National Laboratories to Brown to explore new collaborations and research pathways for faculty and students. Faculty and students showcase their work at a poster session in the Engineering Research Center. Photos by Sherri Miles. PROVIDENCE, R.I. [Brown University] — Artificial intelligence is poised to enable new scientific breakthroughs and technologies in fields spanning energy, materials science, supercomputing and more. The U.S. Department of Energy’s 17 National Laboratories operate at the frontier of applied AI research. On Thursday, May 14, top researchers from those national labs met with faculty, staff and students from Brown University to discuss the future of AI-enabled scientific research. The daylong conference — Brown’s second National Labs Day — aimed to highlight current collaborations between University researchers and the national labs, and identify emerging opportunities for future scientific partnerships. “Brown's vision is using our research excellence to try to solve today's most pressing problems, and collaborations with national labs are really critical for that,” said Greg Hirth, vice president for research at Brown, in his opening remarks. “And today, we're going to be hearing about the cutting edge of AI, which, of course, is on everyone's mind.” Students took advantage of the opportunity to network with top national lab scientists. In total, 18 staff scientists from the Brookhaven, Lawrence Livermore, Los Alamos and Sandia National Laboratories took part in the program. From Brown, more than 150 community members signed up to attend topical sessions aimed at showing how shared AI tools and datasets can accelerate scientific breakthroughs. Sessions focused on AI in energy technologies, basic science research, national security and workforce development. In a late-day session at Brown’s Engineering Research Center, more than 40 posters showcased research happening at Brown in physics, chemistry, engineering, computer science and other fields. Brown researchers have a long history of working with national laboratories. Current and recent collaborations have aimed to develop better batteries , energy-abundant hydrogen fuel cells and next-generation solar cells . In addition to highly applied research, Brown physicists work with national labs to address fundamental questions of the universe — probing the nature of dark matter, understanding the dynamics of high-energy plasmas and uncovering the behavior of fundamental particles of forces . Working with researchers from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Brendan Keith, an assistant professor of applied math, is pushing the frontiers of computer-driven material and structural design. George Karniadakis, a professor of engineering and applied mathematics, is the director of SEA-CROGS , a partnership with Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and Sandia National Laboratories that aims to develop new computational capability to analyze and predict the behavior of complex systems. Thursday’s conference was hosted by Brown’s Division of Research and School of Engineering . In the keynote address, James Ang, chief data scientist for computing at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, discussed collaboration across the national labs on the Genesis Mission , an initiative aimed at harnessing AI to accelerate discovery science. “The structure includes AI for science, AI for energy and AI for security,” Ang said. “And those are really the focus points for [the Department of Energy]. These are our application drivers for the development of new technology for AI.” Barry Chen, machine learning lead at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, presents at National Labs Day. Sara Mason, a senior scientist at Brookhaven National Lab, encouraged her fellow scientists to approach the AI era without fear. “I'm thinking about how we're just living through this exciting time… where there's this fundamental shift in how science is even being done,” Mason said. “We keep moving through it. When I say moving, I don't mean flailing our arms. I mean, we're still ‘sciencing,’ we're still innovating, and we're figuring out ways to use these tools and… find new ways to engage with our science.” Hirth said he’s hopeful that the event will spur new partnerships and create new opportunities for Brown students at the national labs. The event already has a good track record. After the inaugural National Labs Day in 2024, Hirth and a student were part of a group from Brown that paid a visit to Brookhaven National Lab in Upton, New York. As a result of the visit, the student got involved in a research project related to high-pressure phenomena involved in earthquakes. “That's an area where AI is super important,” Hirth said. “You can imagine the Earth makes lots and lots of noise, and analyzing those data is a really hard problem. In what used to be thought of as just random background noise, people can now find discrete events, which is helping us understand the phenomena that lead to earthquakes.” A groundbreaking research partnership to be sure. Tags Research School of Engineering Related news: News and Events At 263rd Convocation, Brown’s new students are encouraged to embrace humility, ask questions September 8, 2026 As Brown officially commenced its 2026-27 academic year, University leaders urged nearly 3,300 new students to be curious, courageous and embrace the unique opportunities of a Brown education. Read Article Open details for At 263rd Convocation, Brown’s new students are encouraged to embrace humility, ask questions News and Events 31 accomplished scholars join Brown faculty as 2026-27 academic year begins September 8, 2026 Representing a wide variety of disciplines and backgrounds, the faculty members join the Brown community to guide student-centered learning and engage in high-impact research. Read Article Open details for 31 accomplished scholars join Brown faculty as 2026-27 academic year begins News and Events Photos: Brown’s newest students make themselves at home during move-in day September 3, 2026 Families and volunteers from across the University helped members of the Class of 2030 settle into their residence halls, launching a full week of New Student Orientation activities. Read Article Open details for Photos: Brown’s newest students make themselves at home during move-in day Brown University Providence RI 02912 401-863-1000 Quick Navigation Visit Brown Campus Map A to Z Contact Us Footer Navigation News Events Campus Safety Accessibility Careers at Brown Give To Brown Social Navigation Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Snapchat X/Twitter YouTube Social Media Directory © Brown University Brown University For You Current Students Faculty Staff Parents & Families Alumni Friends & Neighbors Search Menu Mobile Site Navigation Mobile Site Navigation Featured Events For Journalists Topics Arts and Humanities Environment Health and Medicine News and Events Science and Technology Social Sciences Student Life University Initiatives Mobile Secondary Navigation Navigation About Events For You Give to Brown All of Brown.edu People News Search Search Close Search 