 ASU awarded DOE Genesis Mission grant for electrical grid reliability research | ASU News Skip to main content Report an accessibility problem ASU Home My ASU Colleges and Schools Sign In ASU News Subscribe Search ASU News Stories Home Browse Browse Stories by Topic Science and Technology Arts, Humanities and Education Business and Entrepreneurship Health and Medicine Environment and Sustainability Law, Journalism and Politics Local, National and Global Affairs Sun Devil Community Sports University News Events Explore Full List of Topics ASU Experts Expert Q&A Find an Expert About Us Manage Subscriptions Contact Us Social Media Instagram Threads YouTube Multimedia USA 250th Water Research That Matters For the Media Science and technology ASU awarded DOE Genesis Mission grant for electrical grid reliability research AI-accelerated scenario planning tool will mitigate energy instability and speed infrastructure planning The U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission selected ASU to lead a project to develop an artificial intelligence planning tool to maintain electrical grid resilience through unprecedented challenges. Image by urbans/Shutterstock By Monique Clement | July 22, 2026 An Arizona State University-led research team has been selected by the U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission for a project leveraging artificial intelligence to enhance electrical grid resilience — research with potential for major impact in communities. Karen Fisher-Vanden , a Global Futures professor in the ASU School of Sustainability , a unit of the Rob Walton College of Global Futures , will lead the project. Her research team will develop an AI system to rapidly assess thousands of scenarios of changing energy demands, new technology integration, extreme weather and more. The results will identify the most critical scenarios for maintaining electrical grid reliability, helping advance real solutions more quickly than traditional models. The AI model could also help to lower costs during uncertain times. "Arizona State University is proud to be part of this ambitious Department of Energy initiative,” said Sally C. Morton , executive vice president of ASU Knowledge Enterprise and chief research and innovation officer. “This project reflects the exceptional expertise of our researchers and the power of collaboration across institutions, national laboratories and industry partners. Why this research matters Research is the invisible hand that powers America’s progress. It unlocks discoveries and creates opportunity. It develops new technologies and new ways of doing things. Learn more about ASU discoveries that are contributing to changing the world and making America the world’s leading economic power at researchmatters.asu.edu . “University research matters. By advancing AI-enabled approaches to strengthen the resilience of the electrical grid, we're helping to create knowledge and technologies that can support a more reliable, secure and sustainable energy future in the United States." The award is through the Genesis Mission ’s Transforming Science and Energy With AI initiative. ASU is nationally recognized in grid resilience research, and the project brings together leaders in AI, energy systems and engineering. The team will work with grid operator partners to develop practical tools that maximize value. The research team includes co-principal investigators Julia Szinai from Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory ; Casey Burleyson from Pacific Northwest National Laboratory ; Renee Obringer and Mort Webster from Pennsylvania State University ; and Patricia Hidalgo-Gonzalez from the University of California, San Diego . The historic Genesis Mission united the 17 DOE national laboratories with industry, academia and nonprofit organization partners. Together, they are collaborating to harness AI to transform discovery and strengthen American leadership in science and technology. In addition to energy projects, the Genesis Mission invited interdisciplinary teams to leverage AI to address more than 20 national challenges, including advanced manufacturing, biotechnology, critical materials, nuclear energy and quantum information science. ASU researchers will also work on Genesis Mission projects awarded to other institutions, including one national laboratory. John McGowen , an ASU senior global futures scientist, will work with Pacific Northwest National Laboratory to accelerate cost-effective production of biofuels, biochemicals and other bioproducts. In a project led by Columbia University , Petr Šulc , an associate professor in the ASU School of Molecular Sciences , will help design biomolecular materials with predictable functionality. Artificial intelligence Faculty Grants / Awards Polytechnic campus Bioscience Tempe campus Energy Science and technology Rob Walton College of Global Futures School of Molecular Sciences Julie Ann Wrigley Global Futures Laboratory Biodesign Institute Research The College of Liberal Arts and Sciences Knowledge Enterprise School of Sustainability Artificial intelligence, Faculty, Grants / Awards, Research matters, Polytechnic campus, Bioscience, Tempe campus, Energy, Science and technology, Rob Walton College of Global Futures, School of Molecular Sciences, Julie Ann Wrigley Global Futures Laboratory, Biodesign Institute, Research, The College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Knowledge Enterprise, School of Sustainability Download article assets More Science and technology Study: Shackled men in ancient Greek burial site were locals, not foreigners Located just south of Athens in the historical region of Attica sits one of the largest ancient cemeteries ever found in Greece — the Phaleron burial ground.In 2016, three mass graves were discovered… Read this story Anthropology History Social science Research In wake of Meta settlement, ASU expert shares insights into relationship between teens and tech Last week, Meta agreed to pay up to $18 billion in penalties and make major changes to Facebook and Instagram in response to a lawsuit claiming the company’s platforms were intentionally… Read this story Healthy Living Humanities Social science Technology Research Advancing the future of nondestructive testing Nondestructive testing and evaluation, or NDT/E, enables engineers and technicians to assess materials and structures without damaging them. Its applications extend from inspecting aircraft, bridges… Read this story Innovation Engineering Technology Research Pagination Current page 1 Page 2 Page 3 Page 4 Pagination Current page 1 Page 2 Page 3 … 4 ASU News Contact ASU News Manage subscriptions ASU News Media Relations Science and Technology Arts, Humanities and Education Business and Entrepreneurship Health and Medicine Environment and Sustainability Law, Journalism and Politics Local, National and Global Affairs Sun Devil Community University News University Admissions Financial Aid President's Office About ASU ASU Home Emergency Events ASU Events Athletics Maps and Locations Jobs Directory Contact ASU My ASU Copyright and Trademark Accessibility Privacy Terms of Use Emergency 