 Lehigh Researchers Earn Two DOE Genesis Mission Funding Awards | Lehigh University News Search the Lehigh Website Search X Skip to main content Pathing navigation Students, Faculty & Staff Parents Visitors Alumni About About University Statistics University Leadership University Strategic Plan Lehigh & Our Community Bethlehem & the Lehigh Valley News Events & Venues The Perch Maps & Directions Inclusive Excellence & Belonging Jobs History Learn LU Facts Find Maps View Events Academics Academics Our Approach to Academics Undergraduate Studies Majors & Undergraduate Programs Graduate & Professional Studies 4+1 Accelerated Master’s Degree Programs Faculty Interdisciplinary Opportunities Entrepreneurship & Innovation Creative Inquiry Provost & Academic Affairs International Affairs University Catalog Arts & Libraries Our Colleges: College of Arts & Sciences College of Business College of Education College of Health P.C. Rossin College of Engineering & Applied Science Browse Undergrad Majors Browse Grad Programs Research Research Research Centers & Institutes Student Research Experience Office of Research Graduate Education & Life Lehigh Libraries Read Research Review Learn about Mountaintop Admissions Admissions Undergraduate Admissions Applying to Lehigh Visits & Tours Tuition, Aid & Affording College Admission Statistics Majors & Programs Academics at Lehigh Student Life at Lehigh Student Profiles Post-Graduation Career Outcomes Explore Lehigh Contact Us & Admissions Counselors Graduate Admissions Applying to Graduate Studies Funding Your Graduate Education English Proficiency Requirement for Graduate Studies AI Use in Graduate Program Applications Graduate Student Career Outcomes Life in Bethlehem, PA Student Life Student Life Clubs & Organizations Housing & Dining Student Health & Campus Safety Arts & Athletics Advocacy Centers Student Support & Transition to College Get Involved Browse Housing View Safety Info Athletics Athletics Prospective Student Athletes Radio & TV Broadcasts Camps & Clinics Venues & Directions Campus Athletics Tickets Watch Live Buy Tickets Browse Store Giving Giving GO Beyond: The Campaign for Future Makers Ways to Give The Lehigh Fund Matching Gift Program Corporate & Foundation Relations Contact Us Make a Gift Students, Faculty & Staff Parents Visitors Alumni Menu Lehigh News Features Videos Events Media All Stories Lehigh Researchers Earn Two DOE Genesis Mission Funding Awards Getting your Trinity Audio player ready... Lehigh engineering faculty secure funding to advance efforts in tackling the nation’s real, complex science and technology challenges. Share This Story Story by Katie Clarke Photography by Grace Alto ’26 Posted on July 23, 2026 Tags Faculty Innovating for Impact Innovation Lehigh People Thrive P.C. Rossin College of Engineering and Applied Science Power of Connection Regional and State Impact Research University News University Research Centers Mechanical Engineering And Mechanics Civil and Environmental Engineering Two projects led by Lehigh researchers received funding in the first round of U.S. Department of Energy Genesis Mission grants. The Genesis Mission is an initiative designed to accelerate breakthroughs in energy, scientific discovery and national security through supporting work that combines AI, supercomputing, quantum systems and advanced scientific instruments. The projects, led by P.C. Rossin College of Engineering and Applied Science faculty members Hongyi Li , Eugenio Schuster and Tariq Rafiq , will improve flood-and water-level prediction and enable progress toward safe nuclear fusion energy. Li is an associate professor in the department of civil and environmental engineering and the first new hire into Lehigh’s University Research Center for Catastrophe Modeling and Resilience (CatModeling) . Shuster and Rafiq are part of the mechanical engineering and mechanics department where Shuster is a professor and Rafiq is a research associate professor. Lehigh’s two Phase 1 awards were among 278 selected projects led by national laboratories, universities, companies and nonprofit organizations, and Lehigh was one of only 41 universities leading two or more funded projects. In terms of grants awarded per faculty member, only Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and California Institute of Technology (Caltech) were awarded more grants through this program than Lehigh. This funding reflects the past success of Lehigh faculty in transforming ideas into impact through deeply interdisciplinary research collaborations. "Lehigh's faculty have long done outstanding research at the intersection of AI and energy and we are excited that two proposals from our faculty will be supported by this critical new program,” said Nathan Urban, provost and senior vice president for academic affairs. “This success is connected to our investments in our University Research Centers for Advancing Community Electrification Solutions and in Catastrophe Modeling and Resilience, and highlights the role that Lehigh is playing in advancing innovation needed to create the secure, stable and resilient energy infrastructure that is the foundation of American economic competitiveness." Tariq Rafiq, research associate professor of mechanical engineering and mechanics. Advancing Fusion Energy Through AI Platforms Rafiq and Schuster will lead the project “REACT: Reactor Exhaust And Core Twin — Multi-fidelity AI Predictions for Safe, Integrated, and High-Performance Control.” With colleagues, they will develop AI tools to advance fusion energy. While current nuclear energy generates power through fission (splitting heavy atoms), fusion energy seeks to replicate the power of the sun by combining light atomic isotopes under extreme temperatures. If successfully harnessed, fusion promises an abundant, carbon-free source of clean firm electricity to support the global energy transition. However, realizing fusion energy at reactor scale requires controlling ultra-hot core plasma while simultaneously managing extreme heat and particle exhaust at the reactor walls. Conventional physics simulations of these boundary dynamics can take weeks or months to run, making real-time control impossible. Eugenio Schuster, professor of mechanical engineering and mechanics. The team, led by Lehigh in collaboration with Oak Ridge National Laboratory and Columbia University, is bridging this gap by replacing computationally intensive boundary simulations with ultra-fast AI surrogate models. Integrated directly into a "control-first" digital twin, these AI models calculate accurate plasma states in milliseconds, enabling active closed-loop control to protect reactor surfaces while maintaining peak energy performance. "We are deeply grateful to the Department of Energy for this recognition and support,” said Schuster and Rafiq. “The REACT project allows us to leverage decades of our team's expertise in physics-based modeling and real-time tokamak control, fusing it with cutting-edge AI capabilities enabled by the Genesis Mission.” “By developing AI-driven digital twins for integrated plasma core and exhaust control, this award accelerates our mission to enable safe, predictable and high-performance fusion energy,” Schuster noted. “Furthermore, this award serves as a powerful catalyst to expand Lehigh’s research footprint and strategic impact in nuclear energy technologies as key pillars of our nation's clean energy future.” Rafiq and Schuster are leaders in nuclear-fusion plasma control as co-directors of the internationally recognized Lehigh University Plasma Control Laboratory . Since establishing the laboratory, Schuster and his team have secured over $13 million in competitive DOE and NSF research funding, establishing a sustained track record of developing real-time control frameworks and physics-based models for major fusion facilities worldwide, including DIII-D and NSTX-U in the United States, KSTAR in South Korea and ITER , the world’s largest nuclear fusion reactor under construction in France. Hongyi Li, associate professor of civil and environmental engineering. Tackling Long-Standing Water-Energy Challenges with AI-Powered Model Li will lead the project “RIVER-AI: Reservoir-Groundwater Interactions for River Flow Variability, Energy, and Resilience with AI.” The team includes CatModeling faculty Brian Davison , Daniel E. ’39 and Patricia M. Smith Professor and Chair of the department of computer science and engineering, and Ethan Yang , associate professor in the department of civil and environmental engineering, and collaborators from the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin (UT Austin) and City College of New York. The team will develop a hybrid AI-physics modeling platform, RIVER-AI. Its progress will capture and improve prediction of water availability and risks critical to energy systems and communities, beginning right at the Delaware River Basin, where Bethlehem resides, and transferable to the whole nation. “Rivers supply much of the water that the nation’s energy systems depend on, yet predicting river behavior remains a persistent scientific challenge globally, despite humans’ long history of studying hydrology. Our team is uniquely positioned to tackle this challenge by harvesting the power of AI,” Li said. Rivers, reservoirs and underground aquifers are closely connected and shape how floods and droughts evolve and threaten America’s water and energy security. Today's computer models often treat them as separate systems and, more importantly, poorly simulate how humans manage them. A major barrier is that unstructured contextual information, such as operating manuals, policy provisions and institutional practice, is heavily relied on by real-world water managers yet unreadable to computers and missing from conventional numerical models. A key innovation of RIVER-AI is to use large language models (LLMs) to help translate unstructured, contextual knowledge into machine-readable operating rules. A trustworthy AI workflow then integrates various physics- and AI-based modeling pieces together into a platform that will predict natural hazards better and faster, providing more reliable and actionable support for the nation’s water and energy resilience. “I am deeply grateful for this Genesis Mission award, for the outstanding collaboration of my colleagues and for the exceptional support from Lehigh’s Office of Research and Sponsored Programs , the Center for Catastrophe Modeling and Resilience, the department of civil and environmental engineering and university leadership,” Li added. Li joined Lehigh in January 2026 following a search targeted at hiring faculty connected to the Center for Catastrophe Modeling and Resilience. His research lies at the interface between surface hydrology and earth system modeling from a coupled earth-human system perspective, aiming to understand, predict, and mitigate risks associated with natural hazards. His group develops and uses novel model-driven and data-driven approaches, including big data and artificial intelligence techniques, for better planning and maintaining a sustainable and resilient environment in which we all live. The goal of the Phase I Request for Application awards is to identify promising pathways toward transformative scientific capabilities and establish a foundation for future investment and scale. Project teams will design and demonstrate research workflows that integrate AI with scientific investigation, while rigorously evaluating whether those approaches can accelerate discovery, improve predictive capabilities, enhance experimentation or generate new scientific insights. Share This Story Story by Katie Clarke Photography by Grace Alto ’26 Posted on July 23, 2026 Related Stories Lehigh Students Win 2026 Davis Project for Peace Awards Two teams from Lehigh’s Global Social Impact Fellowship, CareAlert and NewTrition, build innovations for maternal health and population-wide nourishment in Sierra Leone. 1 Audio Available Remembering Laurence Silberstein, Inaugural Berman Professor of Jewish Studies Professor emeritus Laurence Silberstein helped establish Jewish Studies at Lehigh while building a global presence as a scholar of religion, culture and society. 1 Audio Available U.N. Tech Envoy Amandeep Gill Urged Lehigh to Take an Active Role in Shaping the Future of AI Gill rejected the idea that technology alone will determine AI’s future, stating that people still have control over how it develops. 1 Audio Available More Stories > Editorial Contacts Kristen DiPrinzio Director, University Communications Lauren Thein Stephen Gross Katie Clarke Media Contact For inquiries, visit the media page or contact: Amy White (610) 758-6656 abw210@lehigh.edu Lehigh University Communications and Public Affairs 516 Broadhead Avenue Bethlehem, PA 18015 U.S.A. P: (610) 758-4487 Fax: (610) 758-5566 communications@lehigh.edu GO Beyond: The Campaign for Future Makers Be part of the most ambitious fundraising and engagement effort in Lehigh's history. Visit the campaign website now > Join the conversation Follow Lehigh on Instagram Follow Lehigh on Facebook Watch Lehigh Videos on YouTube Follow Lehigh on LinkedIn Follow Lehigh Admissions on TikTok Follow Lehigh on Threads The Perch Directory Maps Contact Emergency Info Web Accessibility Lehigh Mobile Apps Terms of Use Privacy Higher Education Opportunity Act Equitable Community Non-Discrimination Annual Security & Annual Fire Safety Report Report a Concern 27 Memorial Drive West, Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA Phone: (610) 758-3000 © 2026 All Rights Reserved © 2026 All rights reserved. 