 FRIB receives Genesis Mission award for AI-powered research FRIB receives Genesis Mission award for AI-powered research | MSUToday | Michigan State University Jump to Header Jump to Main Content Jump to Footer Michigan State University Browse Stories By Topics Explore stories by subject area Arts and Culture Business and Economy Climate and Environment Education and Learning Engineering, Science and Technology Government and Society Health and Medicine Media and Communications MSU Leadership and Impact Sports and Recreation Student and Campus Experience View All Stories Collections Curated story series Turfgrass Ask the Expert Big Ideas Climate solutions Water at MSU Mobility Spartan Perspectives Student views Graduate voices Faculty voices View All Collections Featured Editor's picks July 22, 2026 The Spartans behind your favorite Michigan golf courses July 14, 2026 MSU in the 1990s: 10 Spartan milestones MSUTODAY Browse Stories By < Browse Stories By Topics Explore stories by subject area Arts and Culture Business and Economy Climate and Environment Education and Learning Engineering, Science and Technology Government and Society Health and Medicine Media and Communications MSU Leadership and Impact Sports and Recreation Student and Campus Experience View All Stories Collections Curated story series Turfgrass Ask the Expert Big Ideas Climate solutions Water at MSU Mobility Spartan Perspectives Student views Graduate voices Faculty voices View All Collections Featured Editor's picks July 22, 2026 The Spartans behind your favorite Michigan golf courses July 14, 2026 MSU in the 1990s: 10 Spartan milestones For Media Experts Releases and Statements Sign Up Update Information Resources A to Z Index Find People Maps Email Student Information System (SIS) D2L Libraries Tech Support MSU Misconduct Hotline Social Media Directory Events Calendar For Media Michigan State University MSUToday For Media Experts Releases and Statements Sign Up Update Information MSUTODAY Nuclear Science July 23, 2026 | Read time 5 min FRIB receives Genesis Mission award for AI-powered research The Facility for Rare Isotope Beams , or FRIB, at Michigan State University, in collaboration with Argonne National Laboratory , was chosen to receive a Genesis Mission Phase I award from the U.S. Department of Energy. The project will develop artificial intelligence , or AI, tools — specifically, physics-informed “digital twins” — that could transform how heavy-ion accelerators and isotope separators are operated. Peter Ostroumov. Courtesy of the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams The project, titled “Towards Self-Evolving, Physics-Informed Digital Twins of Ion Accelerators and Isotope Separators,” is led by Peter Ostroumov, associate director of the Accelerator Systems Division and professor at FRIB, and Brahim Mustapha, accelerator physicist at Argonne National Laboratory. The award is among the inaugural national portfolio of projects the DOE announced 22 July under the Genesis Mission Request for Applications , or RFA, as part of the Genesis Mission , designed to double America’s scientific productivity. The Genesis Mission is a historic national initiative led by the DOE, which is building the world’s most powerful integrated science discovery platform. By uniting government, industry, academia and philanthropy, it is accelerating breakthroughs in energy, scientific discovery and national security through a new platform that combines AI, supercomputing, quantum systems and advanced scientific instruments. Out of the largest funding response in DOE history — resulting in 278 awards across 342 participating institutions — the FRIB-Argonne collaboration places MSU at the leading edge of AI-driven scientific innovation. MSU operates FRIB as a user facility for the DOE Office of Science, or DOE-SC , with financial support from and furthering the mission of the DOE-SC Office of Nuclear Physics. Hosting the most powerful heavy-ion accelerator, FRIB enables scientists to make discoveries about the properties of rare isotopes in order to better understand the physics of nuclei, nuclear astrophysics, fundamental interactions, and applications for society, including in medicine, homeland security and industry. As a DOE-SC user facility based at a university, FRIB advances the goals of the Genesis Mission by harnessing artificial intelligence to accelerate discovery in nuclear science and develop the workforce. The goal of the Phase I RFA awards is to identify promising pathways toward transformative scientific capabilities and establish a foundation for future investment and scale. Project teams will design and demonstrate research workflows that integrate AI with scientific investigation, while rigorously evaluating whether those approaches can accelerate discovery, improve predictive capabilities, enhance experimentation or generate new scientific insights. “At MSU, our land-grant mission has always been about tackling huge challenges that make a real difference. Receiving this Genesis Mission award alongside Argonne National Laboratory underscores the power of pairing top university talent with national lab resources,” said Shashank Priya, vice president for Research and Innovation at MSU. “By integrating physics-informed AI directly into FRIB’s operations, we’re helping scientists spend more time making discoveries in nuclear medicine, energy and fundamental science that create solutions with broad societal benefit.” FRIB and the Argonne Tandem Linac Accelerator System, or ATLAS , are DOE Office of Science user facilities that provide scientists with beams of rare isotopes to study the properties of atomic nuclei and their applications. Because experiments require different ion species and beam characteristics, operators must frequently adjust thousands of accelerator parameters to deliver beams with the required energy, intensity and purity. The process is highly complex and requires significant expertise. The FRIB-Argonne team will develop physics-informed digital twins — virtual models grounded in the underlying physics of accelerator systems that continuously learn from operational data. By combining AI with established physics models, the project will create adaptive digital twins that provide a powerful new tool for accelerator optimization and control. The digital twins will provide a safe, virtual environment to test and optimize machine settings before applying them to physical hardware. Over time, the digital twins will become more accurate as they learn from real-world operations. The long-term goal is to create an integrated digital representation of the accelerator and isotope separator systems rather than optimizing each component independently. Demonstrating success in Phase I establishes the framework to extend the digital twin architecture across both the entire FRIB and ATLAS facilities under a potential Phase II award. “It’s an honor for the FRIB team to be part of the historic Genesis Mission,” Ostroumov said. “Transforming a complex facility like FRIB into a more efficient, autonomous and productive scientific user facility requires tightly integrating AI into every stage of rare-isotope production. This project is an important step toward that vision.” MEDIA CONTACTS Emilie Lorditch Nuclear Science Engineering, Science and Technology Natural Sciences Latest News MSUToday Weekly Update The MSUToday Weekly Update email showcases how Spartans are making a difference through academic excellence, research impact and community outreach. Get inspired by these stories of innovation, collaboration and determination. Plus, enjoy photos and videos of campus and more MSU content to help keep you connected to the Spartan community. Sign Up Update My Information Connect With Us Visit our Facebook page Visit our page on X Visit our Instagram page Visit our LinkedIn page Visit our YouTube page Visit our TikTok page Health and Safety MSU Police and Public Safety Olin Health Center Counseling & Psychiatric Services (CAPS) University Health and Wellbeing MSU Health Care Civil Rights and Title IX Our Commitment Center for Survivors Security & Fire Safety Report University Policy on Relationship Violence and Sexual Misconduct Notice of Non-Discrimination, Anti-Harassment and Non-Retaliation Health Care Non-Discrimination Notice Support Services Disability Resources Supportive Services Learning Resources Working at MSU Human Resources EBS Login Job Postings Employee Assistance Program Reports CARES Act Funding Student Achievement and Outcomes Contact us 517-355-1855 Address Michigan State University 426 Auditorium Road East Lansing, MI 48824 Follow Us Visit our Facebook page Visit our page on X Visit our Instagram page Visit our TikTok page Visit our LinkedIn page Visit our YouTube page If you're having accessibility issues, please let us know. Contact Information | Site Map | Privacy Statement | Site Accessibility | Call MSU: (517) 355-1855 | Visit: msu.edu | Notice of Nondiscrimination | SPARTANS WILL | © Michigan State University | 