 MP Materials | Rare Earth Materials & Magnetics Producer Skip to main content Open main menu Materials Magnetics About Investors Careers Media Suppliers Contact MP Materials is America's rare earth magnetics champion MP Materials is America’s only fully integrated rare earth producer with capabilities spanning the entire supply chain—from mining and processing to advanced metallization and magnet manufacturing. We extract and refine materials from one of the world’s richest rare earth deposits in California and manufacture the world’s strongest and most efficient permanent magnets. Our products enable innovation across critical sectors of the modern economy, including transportation, energy, robotics, defense, and aerospace. Extraction High grade ore is responsibly mined and processed in Mountain Pass, California. Through multiple stages of flotation, we produce a high-purity rare earth concentrate. Refining The concentrate is separated and refined into high-purity rare earth compounds at Mountain Pass and reduced to metal. Manufacturing Rare earths are combined with other metals to produce the world's most powerful and efficient permanent magnets at Independence , our state-of-the-art facility in Texas. Elements for critical applications Rare earth magnetics power the industries that drive human progress. Founder-led and owner-operated, MP Materials is on a mission to restore the full rare earth supply chain to the United States. We collaborate with customers to build revolutionary products and the materials infrastructure that powers them. Fully integrated for speed and efficiency With end-to-end capabilities—spanning mining, refining, and magnet manufacturing—we deliver unmatched scale, efficiency, and operational precision. Materials provenance you can trust We set the standard for ethical, responsible practices, providing customers unmatched visibility and accountability in an otherwise opaque supply chain. Excellence in execution At MP Materials, precision is our foundation. With rigorous quality control, we reliably deliver the materials and magnets that power our customers’ success. Reindustrializing America responsibly From closed-loop water recycling to industry-leading safety performance, we are committed to setting new standards for environmental excellence and prioritizing our people and communities at every step of the journey. Explore Sustainability Efforts Connect with us: X Linked In View on YouTube Company Materials Division Magnetics Division About Our Story Leadership Sustainability Facilities Connect Careers Media Contact Resources Suppliers Investors Legal Accessibility 