 Jesse Thaler named director of the Laboratory for Nuclear Science | MIT News | Massachusetts Institute of Technology Skip to content ↓ Massachusetts Institute of Technology MIT Top Menu ↓ Education Research Innovation Admissions + Aid Campus Life News Alumni About MIT More ↓ Search MIT Search websites, locations, and people See More Results Suggestions or feedback? MIT News | Massachusetts Institute of Technology - On Campus and Around the world Subscribe to MIT News newsletter Browse Enter keywords to search for news articles: Submit Browse By Topics View All → Explore: Machine learning Sustainability Startups Black holes Classes and programs Departments View All → Explore: Aeronautics and Astronautics Brain and Cognitive Sciences Architecture Political Science Mechanical Engineering Centers, Labs, & Programs View All → Explore: Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) Picower Institute for Learning and Memory Media Lab Lincoln Laboratory Schools School of Architecture + Planning School of Engineering School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences Sloan School of Management School of Science MIT Schwarzman College of Computing View all news coverage of MIT in the media → Listen to audio content from MIT News → Subscribe to MIT newsletter → Close Breadcrumb MIT News Jesse Thaler named director of the Laboratory for Nuclear Science Jesse Thaler named director of the Laboratory for Nuclear Science The professor of physics and inaugural director of the NSF AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions will lead LNS and continue his research in particle physics. Julia C. Keller | School of Science Publication Date : July 7, 2026 Press Inquiries Press Contact : Julia C. Keller Email: jckeller@mit.edu Phone: 617-324-9354; 617-817-6368 (cell) School of Science Close Caption : Jesse Thaler combines techniques from quantum field theory and machine learning to address outstanding questions in fundamental physics. Credits : Photo: Jared Charney Previous image Next image Professor Jesse Thaler has been named director of the MIT Laboratory for Nuclear Science (LNS), effective Aug. 1. He succeeds Professor Bolek Wyslouch, who directed LNS for the past decade. Thaler is a theoretical particle physicist who combines techniques from quantum field theory and machine learning to address outstanding questions in fundamental physics. “In his research, Jesse has done pioneering work on particle jets at the Large Hadron Collider and is a leader in combining AI and machine learning with fundamental particle physics,” says Nergis Mavalvala, dean of the MIT School of Science and the Curtis and Kathleen Marble Professor of Astrophysics. “The collaborative nature of his research programs will serve the Laboratory for Nuclear Science as science enters a new era of AI-driven discovery.” Thaler is the William and Emma Rogers Professor of Physics in the MIT Center for Theoretical Physics — a Leinweber Institute (CTP-LI). Since 2020, he has served as inaugural director of the National Science Foundation (NSF) AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions, or IAIFI, which was recently renewed for another five years . Mike Williams, professor of physics, will succeed Thaler as IAIFI director. LNS is also poised to pursue new research projects through the Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission, which has a focus on AI-enabled scientific discovery. “In my own field of particle physics, researchers are developing cutting-edge AI algorithms to handle the data deluge from collider experiments and to perform heroic theoretical calculations. This work has direct implications for discovering new physics, but the algorithms themselves turn out to be valuable well beyond our field,” says Thaler. “I’m excited to bring LNS into the next wave of discoveries supported by AI-driven capabilities.” At IAIFI, Thaler has championed education and research activities at the intersection of physics and AI. With the MIT Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, IAIFI leadership created a doctoral program in physics, statistics, and data science. IAIFI also created dedicated postdoctoral fellowships to give early-career researchers the freedom to pursue interdisciplinary work. “Giving young scientists space to build connections across domains, universities, and career stages has been transformative within IAIFI,” says Thaler, who hopes to bring this type of framework to LNS. Established in 1946 to support nuclear and particle physics, LNS now encompasses research spanning cosmology, gravity, field theory, and quantum information science. As head of LNS, Thaler will also oversee his home center of CTP-LI, which last year received a donation from the Leinweber Foundation to establish a network of theoretical physics research institutes. According to the Science Philanthropy Alliance, a nonprofit organization that promotes philanthropy for science, this constitutes the largest philanthropic commitment ever for this field. Thaler received his PhD in physics from Harvard University in 2006, and his BS in math/physics from Brown University in 2002. From 2006 to 2009, he was a fellow at the Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science at the University of California at Berkeley. He joined the MIT faculty in 2010. Share this news article on: X Facebook LinkedIn Reddit Print Related Links Jesse Thaler MIT Center for Theoretical Physics — a Leinweber Institute (CTP-LI) Laboratory for Nuclear Science NSF AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions (IAIFI) Department of Physics School of Science Related Topics Leadership Faculty Physics Laboratory for Nuclear Science IDSS Artificial intelligence Data National Science Foundation (NSF) Department of Energy (DoE) School of Science Related Articles Boleslaw Wyslouch steps down as director of Laboratory for Nuclear Science NSF renews support for MIT-led AI and physics institute, expanding a new model for discovery 3 Questions: On the future of AI and the mathematical and physical sciences $20 million gift supports theoretical physics research and education at MIT Jesse Thaler: Seeking the fundamental nature of matter Previous item Next item More MIT News Study predicts large disparities in access to food, water, and energy in 2050 In some regions of the world, the poorest people may spend about 50 percent of their income on food, while the richest spend about 5 percent. Read full story → Researchers tune into Arctic under-ice sounds and test through-ice communication The work is part of a multiyear effort to develop a distributed sensor network for relaying data collected from this critical region. Read full story → Governor Healey, MIT President Kornbluth to Kick Off Festivities at MIT Future Fest The five-day festival will explore the future of science, technology, art and design from Wednesday, Sept. 30 to Sunday, Oct. 4 Read full story → Stories from the steel mills: A model for sharing workers’ histories MIT anthropologist Chris Walley developed a project for people in Southeast Chicago to tell their histories — an approach any community can adopt. Read full story → New method allows scientists to follow gene activity over time in the same cells In the new method, cells package and export their RNA, enabling researchers to sequence and analyze the RNA without killing the cells. Read full story → How architects turned a hulking brick box into MIT’s newest academic hub A venerable storage facility has become a 21st-century architectural tour de force. Here are the key decisions that transformed the Met Warehouse. Read full story → More news on MIT News homepage → More about MIT News at Massachusetts Institute of Technology This website is managed by the MIT News Office, part of the Institute Office of Communications . News by Schools/College: School of Architecture and Planning School of Engineering School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences MIT Sloan School of Management School of Science MIT Schwarzman College of Computing Resources: About the MIT News Office MIT News Press Center Terms of Use Press Inquiries Filming Guidelines RSS Feeds Tools: Subscribe to MIT Daily/Weekly Subscribe to press releases Submit campus news Guidelines for campus news contributors Guidelines on generative AI Massachusetts Institute of Technology MIT Top Level Links: Education Research Innovation Admissions + Aid Campus Life News Alumni About MIT Join us in building a better world. Massachusetts Institute of Technology 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA, USA Recommended Links: Visit Map (opens in new window) Events (opens in new window) People (opens in new window) Careers (opens in new window) Contact Privacy Accessibility Social Media Hub MIT on X MIT on Facebook MIT on YouTube MIT on Instagram 