 Northwestern projects receive Genesis Mission funding - Northwestern Now Skip to main content Northwestern University For Journalists Northwestern Now Northwestern in the News All Stories Browse Topics Menu Research & Innovation Science & Technology Artificial Intelligence Environment Space Wearable Technology View all Science & Technology Business, Media & Politics Business Economics Media Politics View all Business, Media & Politics Health & Medicine Brain Cancer Healthspan Heart Public Health View all Health & Medicine View all Research & Innovation Campus Life Arts Athletics Student Experience View all Campus Life Impact Community Engagement Global News View all Impact University News Faculty Accolades Gifts Ryan Field University News View all University News Northwestern in the News All Stories Browse Topics For Journalists Search Search this site Search Research & Innovation Science & Technology View all Artificial Intelligence Environment Space Wearable Technology Business, Media & Politics View all Business Economics Media Politics Health & Medicine View all Brain Cancer Healthspan Heart Public Health All Research & Innovation Campus Life Arts Athletics Student Experience All Campus Life Impact Community Engagement Global News All Impact University News Faculty Accolades Gifts Ryan Field University News All University News Click or hit Enter to open search menu Search this site Search Trending Topics: Arts Faculty Accolades Gifts Northwestern projects receive Genesis Mission funding U.S. Department of Energy initiative aims to transform how complex scientific problems are investigated and solved July 22, 2026 | By Northwestern Now Staff With Phase 1 funding, Northwestern project teams will design, develop and test AI-enabled research workflows to explore new approaches to scientific discovery. The goal is to determine whether integrating AI with scientific investigation can accelerate discovery, improve predictive capabilities, enhance experimentation and generate new scientific insights, while establishing a foundation for future investment. Getty Images Artificial Intelligence Computer Science Global News Innovation University News The U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission has selected four projects with ties to Northwestern University for Phase I funding. The national initiative aims to build the world’s most powerful scientific platform with a goal to double the productivity and impact of American research and innovation within a decade. Recipients gathered today (July 22) in Washington, D.C., for the Genesis Mission Summit and official launch of the initiative’s first cohort. Northwestern-affiliated projects include efforts to discover materials for fusion energy, design electronics for quantum technologies and develop a more sustainable way to manufacture plastics from captured carbon. “In this crucial moment for American innovation transformed by AI, Northwestern’s researchers are rising to meet the charge,” said Mung Chiang, president of Northwestern. “The Genesis Mission provides even greater opportunity for our researchers to contribute impactful scientific advancement for the benefit of our nation and society. Having four proposals funded by the inaugural round of Genesis Mission is another reflection of Northwestern faculty’s research excellence." With Phase 1 funding, project teams will design, develop and test AI-enabled research workflows to explore new approaches to scientific discovery. The goal is to determine whether integrating AI with scientific investigation can accelerate discovery, improve predictive capabilities, enhance experimentation and generate new scientific insights, while establishing a foundation for future investment. “The Genesis Mission is an important framework for advancing the future of AI-enabled energy research in the United States,” said Sumit Dhar , Northwestern’s interim vice president for research. “We are proud that Northwestern researchers will help shape this historic initiative as members of its inaugural cohort. Their selection reflects the high quality and depth of science being conducted at Northwestern as well as the strength of our critical partnership with Argonne National Laboratory.” Here are the four projects. A step toward viable fusion energy Led by Randall Q. Snurr , one team will search for new materials capable of separating lithium isotopes, a critical step toward enabling the future of fusion energy. Although fusion promises abundant clean energy, it depends on a scarce lithium isotope to produce fuel. “The scientific principles behind lithium isotope separation are understood, but the materials landscape remains largely unexplored,” Snurr said. “By combining physics-based simulation, machine learning and carefully targeted experiments, we hope to move beyond isolated discoveries and create a systematic way to identify materials with the performance needed for a viable domestic fusion fuel cycle.” Snurr is the John G. Searle Professor of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Northwestern’s McCormick School of Engineering. Northwestern’s co-investigators are Omar K. Farha , Filip Formalik and Justin M. Notestein . Systems for quantum tech McCormick’s Jie Gu will contribute to an Argonne-led project to develop AI-enabled tools for designing electronic systems that can operate at temperatures near absolute zero for quantum technologies and advanced scientific instruments. Gu will incorporate superconducting elements into commercial chip fabrication processes to investigate how they might improve performance of cryogenic complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) circuits. “CMOS is the workhorse of modern electronics and understanding how to get the most out of it at cryogenic temperatures is essential,” said Gu, a professor of electrical and computer engineering. “What excites me about this project is the opportunity to explore what becomes possible when you combine strong CMOS design with the unique capabilities that superconducting materials offer, all within a single commercial chip platform.” Converting captured carbon into polyethylene Led by Edward “Ted” Sargent , another project will use AI to coordinate a new manufacturing process for converting captured carbon into polyethylene, one of the world’s most widely used plastics. Today, industry makes polyethylene through an energy-intensive process that uses fossil-fuel-derived hydrocarbons. Replacing hydrocarbons with captured carbon could reduce both fossil fuel use and greenhouse gas emissions. “The Genesis Mission creates an opportunity to connect artificial intelligence directly with the physical process of scientific discovery,” Sargent said. “By bringing computation, experimentation and advanced scientific infrastructure into a shared workflow, we have the potential to investigate important problems with a speed and level of precision that previously were not possible.” Sargent is the Lynn Hopton Davis and Greg Davis Professor of Chemistry at Northwestern’s Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences , a professor of electrical and computer engineering at McCormick and director of the Paula M. Trienens Institute for Sustainability and Energy . Identifying better quantum-computing strategies Weinberg’s Ian Low will contribute to an Argonne-led project to develop an AI-enabled framework to identify efficient quantum-computing workflows for simulating protons and neutrons, the particles that form atomic nuclei. Predicting how these strongly interacting particles behave remains a fundamental challenge in physics and is essential to understanding the structure of ordinary matter. “Quantum computing and quantum simulation could open new ways to investigate the universe at its most fundamental level,” said Low, a professor of physics and astronomy. “Realizing that potential will require combining AI with scientific expertise to identify quantum-computing strategies that are both efficient and physically meaningful.” Read more about the Genesis Mission and each project at the Office for Research . For Journalists: Get the news release, media contacts and press kit Editor’s Picks As urban tree shade shrinks, mortality rises August 5, 2026 What to know about the record-setting Cyclospora outbreak July 21, 2026 Querrey InQbation Lab now home to 25 resident Illinois companies July 14, 2026 Related Stories Football is back on the lakefront: What to know about game days in September September 2, 2026 Five young researchers receive NSF CAREER Awards August 19, 2026 The Garage named best university incubator by Time magazine August 18, 2026 Never miss a story: Get the latest stories from Northwestern Now sent directly to your inbox. Subscribe Northwestern University Media Relations Address 1603 Orrington Avenue 2nd Floor Evanston, IL 60201 Phone number (847) 491-5001 Email address news@northwestern.edu Subscribe Get the latest news delivered to your inbox. Sign Up Now Northwestern Resources Accessibility Building Access Campus Emergency Information Careers Contact Northwestern University Privacy Statement Report a Concern University Policies © 2026 Northwestern University Facebook Twitter Instagram YouTube TikTok LinkedIn RSS Disclaimer --> 