 Princeton researchers awarded Genesis Mission grants from Department of Energy to lead projects that accelerate AI use for scientific discovery Skip to main content Princeton University Menu News News Submenu All Stories Research Roundup Princeton in the News Search Search Sites & People × Princeton researchers awarded Genesis Mission grants from Department of Energy to lead projects that accelerate AI use for scientific discovery Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn Email Print By Molly Seltzer, Office of Communications, and Rachel Kremen, Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory on July 22, 2026, 12:24 p.m. Princeton University faculty members Hantao Ji, Egemen Kolemen, Josh Atkinson and Jürgen Hackl have been awarded grants to lead projects in the Genesis Mission, a nationwide initiative that was announced today by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), encompassing 278 projects to harness artificial intelligence for scientific discovery. Josh Atkinson, Jürgen Hackl, Hantao Ji and Egemen Kolemen Photos of Atkinson, Hackl and Kolemen by David Kelly Crow; photo of Ji by Michael Livingston “The national portfolio of research teams will help develop and demonstrate AI-enabled scientific workflows designed to accelerate breakthroughs in energy, discovery science, and national security,” the DOE said in its announcement . “Designed to double America’s scientific productivity, the Genesis Mission brings together DOE’s world-class scientific capabilities, advanced AI, high-performance computing, and the nation’s leading researchers to transform how scientific discovery is conducted and strengthen American leadership in science and technology.” “The DOE mission and our Princeton researchers’ contributions will showcase the power of the scientific community to develop cutting-edge artificial intelligence techniques to advance discoveries that will benefit society,” said Peter Schiffer, Princeton’s dean for research and vice president for the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory. Hantao Ji is a professor of astrophysical sciences at Princeton University and a distinguished research fellow at the DOE’s Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL). He will lead a Genesis Mission project that aims to accelerate plasma physics and fusion research, and the ability to predict space weather events. It is centered around a process known as magnetic reconnection, which releases bursts of energy and radiation that can cause solar flares that damage satellites and telecommunications infrastructure. These bursts can also disrupt the fusion process in fusion energy devices like those at PPPL. With collaborators from PPPL, Boston University, Los Alamos National Laboratory, UC-Santa Barbara and TAE Technologies, this project will train neural networks to model measurements that are too difficult or costly to make in the lab, and to identify critical plasma structures during multiscale magnetic reconnection on the Facility for Laboratory Reconnection Experiments (FLARE ) at PPPL. Egemen Kolemen is a professor of mechanical and aerospace engineering and the Andlinger Center for Energy and the Environment, and a staff research physicist at PPPL. The project he leads will aim to speed the development of commercial fusion power by building a multi-modal, multi-device AI model that predicts the behavior of plasmas inside fusion devices, far into the future, which significantly improves the control of plasmas. These super hot gases are so complex that traditional models often fall short. In addition to PPPL scientists, the companies General Atomics and Next Step Fusion are collaborators on the project. The researchers will also use AI to build a “digital twin” that can simulate an entire experiment based only on a starting point and a set of controls. The digital twin helps with testing and optimizing many ideas in a matter of minutes, without the time required to build and test experimental devices. Josh Atkinson is leading a team with Jürgen Hackl on a Genesis Mission project that aims to build a machine learning model that can predict how microbes transfer DNA. Atkinson is an assistant professor of civil and environmental engineering and the Omenn-Darling Bioengineering Institute. Hackl is an assistant professor of civil and environmental engineering. DNA transfer among microbial communities is how antibiotic resistance spreads among bacteria and is also key to bioengineering microbes for beneficial uses, such as wastewater treatment and agriculture. Atkinson and Hackl, with colleagues at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, will build a machine learning model that predicts the pathways by which mobile DNA is transferred through bacterial communities and identifies which organisms are most likely to acquire it. Princeton researchers are also playing leading roles in other institutions' Genesis Mission projects: Reed Maxwell , the William and Edna Macaleer Professor of Engineering and Applied Science and professor of civil and environmental engineering and the High Meadows Environmental Institute, is a principal investigator on a project led by Argonne National Laboratory that will use AI to help forecast groundwater levels, soil moisture, streamflow and water depths. The goal is to better predict the availability of water for people and crops, along with the risk for floods. Joshua Shaevitz , professor of physics and the Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, is a principal investigator on a University of Missouri-led effort to transform synthetic-cell design from trial and error into predictive science. His team will use advanced microscopy techniques to watch molecules move inside synthetic cells and test whether AI can predict how cells respond when redesigned — a step toward engineering cells that could manufacture new medicines and advanced materials. Anatoly Spitkovsky, professor of astrophysical sciences, is a principal investigator on a project led by Emory University that will use AI to help understand how tiny particles of plasma combine to create large-scale patterns in two very different plasmas: “dusty” plasma created in the laboratory and plasma that exists as powerful shock waves in space. The work aims to accelerate research on fusion energy, plasma manufacturing and space-weather forecasting. PPPL is a DOE National Laboratory managed by Princeton University, and is leading or involved with multiple Genesis Mission projects . Related Stories Unprecedented new device at PPPL will help unravel mysteries of the universe . The Facility for Laboratory Reconnection Experiments (FLARE) represents the next generation of research into fundamental plasma physics at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory. U.S. Secretary of Energy Wright visits Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory . Wright emphasized the role of national laboratories in advancing science research priorities. PPPL scientists bring mysterious magnetic process down to earth . Scientists at the U.S. Department of Energy's Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL) are recreating magnetic reconnection, one of the most common but least understood phenomena in the universe. The experiments seek to unravel the secrets of magnetic reconnection and ultimately provide benefits including improved prediction of solar outbursts and dangerous geomagnetic storms; increased understanding of the formation of the sun and stars; and greater control of the nuclear fusion reactions that PPPL researchers are studying as a clean fuel for generating electric power. First plasma for new machine to study process that occurs throughout the universe . A millisecond burst of light on a computer monitor on March 4 signaled production of the first plasma in a powerful new device for advancing research into magnetic reconnection — a critical but little understood process that occurs throughout the universe. Eight promising projects receive Schmidt Transformative Technology Fund awards . The goal of the fund is to enable researchers to make bold leaps rather than incremental advances in the natural sciences and engineering. This year's cohort marks the largest number of annual awards in the fund’s history. DOE and Princeton University extend, strengthen partnership . The U.S. Department of Energy and Princeton University have signed a five-year extension of the contract for Princeton’s management and operation of the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory. PPPL scientists take key step toward solving a major astrophysical mystery . Magnetic reconnection in the Earth and sun's atmospheres can trigger geomagnetic storms that disrupt cell phone service, damage satellites and blackout power grids. In a new paper, scientists at the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory and Princeton University have taken a key step toward understanding this unsolved problem in plasma astrophysics. View All News Princeton University Main navigation Meet Princeton Submenu for Meet Princeton In Service of Humanity Facts & Figures History Honors & Awards Contact Us Visit Us Our Faculty Our Students Our Alumni Our Staff Our Leadership Academic Freedom and Free Expression Strategic Planning Framework Princeton University’s Impact Academics Submenu for Academics Studying at Princeton Library Areas of Study Humanities Social Sciences Engineering Natural Sciences Advising Academic Calendar Course Tools Learning Abroad Career Development Continuing Education Innovative Learning Research Submenu for Research Engineering & Applied Science Humanities Natural Sciences Social Sciences Dean for Research Office Interdisciplinary Approach External Partnerships Facilities & Labs One Community Submenu for One Community Lifelong Connections Student Life Arts & Culture Athletics Living in Princeton, N.J. Housing & Dining Activities & Organizations Cultural & Affinity Groups Health & Wellness Religious Life Serving the Public Good Families Admission & Aid Submenu for Admission & Aid Affordable for All About Financial Aid Current Undergraduate Financial Aid Undergraduate Admission Graduate Admission For International Students StandUp . Stand Up for Princeton and Higher Education Athletics . Go Princeton Tigers Utility menu News Events Work at Princeton Student Links Alumni Giving Inside Princeton Contact links Contact Us Accessibility Help Directory Visiting links Plan a Visit Maps & Shuttles Varsity Athletics Giving to Princeton Academic links Library Academic Calendar Student Links Faculty & Staff Links Footer social media Facebook Twitter Instagram Snapchat LinkedIn YouTube Bluesky Social Media Directory Diversity and Non-discrimination Equal Opportunity and Non-discrimination at Princeton University: Princeton University believes that commitment to equal opportunity for all is favorable to the free and open exchange of ideas, and the University seeks to reach out as widely as possible in order to attract the most qualified individuals as students, faculty, and staff. In applying this policy, the University is committed to nondiscrimination on the basis of personal beliefs or characteristics such as political views, religion, national origin, ancestry, race, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, pregnancy and related conditions, age, marital or domestic partnership status, veteran status, disability and/or other characteristics protected by applicable law in any phase of its education or employment programs or activities. In addition, pursuant to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 and supporting regulations, Princeton does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the education programs or activities that it operates; this extends to admission and employment. Inquiries about the application of Title IX and its supporting regulations may be directed to the University’s Sexual Misconduct/Title IX Coordinator or to the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, Office for Civil Rights, U.S. Department of Education. See Princeton’s full Equal Opportunity Policy and Nondiscrimination Statement . Princeton University Princeton, NJ 08544 Operator: (609) 258-3000 © 2026 The Trustees of Princeton University Subfooter links Copyright Infringement Privacy Notice 