 2 Purdue AI research projects selected among the first Genesis Mission awards - News Skip to content News Home Articles Topics Faculty and Staff News Research News Media Resources Media Contacts Newsletter Sign-up CLOSE News Search Home Articles Topics Faculty and Staff News Research News Media Resources Media Contacts Newsletter Sign-up Helpful links Research Excellence Purdue Computes Daniels School Of Business Purdue University In Indianapolis Quick links The Persistent Pursuit Purdue News on Youtube Purdue in the News Purdue University Events 2 Purdue AI research projects selected among the first Genesis Mission awards Two Purdue University faculty are leading separate projects recently announced for funding by the U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission awards. Purdue is the only university in Indiana to lead projects under AI-focused research awards. (Purdue University photo/Becky Robiños) August 12, 2026 Brian Huchel Share Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Print WEST LAFAYETTE, Ind. — Purdue University leads two projects at the forefront of the U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE) efforts to accelerate the process of scientific discovery by utilizing artificial intelligence. Purdue is the only university in Indiana to lead a project under the Genesis Mission awards, the DOE’s largest science and technology funding effort. Only 278 projects out of 5,000 covering all 50 states were selected on topics including energy, discovery science and national security research. The Purdue projects are led by College of Science faculty from the Department of Physics and Astronomy and the Department of Computer Science alongside private, academic and government partners and will be focused on data science and AI. Dan DeLaurentis, Purdue’s executive vice president for research, said the recognition is a “strong statement about where our faculty stand nationally. “The selection of two Purdue projects for the Genesis Mission awards underscores our academic progress,” DeLaurentis said. “Successfully using AI to push the rate of scientific discovery can establish a new future in scientific discovery.” One project led by Wei Xie, professor of physics and astronomy; Miaoyuan Liu, assistant professor of physics and astronomy; and Ruqi Zhang, assistant professor of computer science, will focus on organizing the intense data streams to be generated by the Electron-Ion Collider. This flagship U.S. research facility and the world’s first polarized electron-ion collider is currently under construction. The team will design and develop autonomous, on-sensor and real-time machine learning models with agentic AI assistance intended to identify important particle interactions and compress data, allowing scientific instruments to recognize which data matters most and minimize data loss. The second project will be run by David F. Gleich, a professor of computer science. For the research, Gleich will investigate to what extent large language models (LLM) can directly cite their training data. This behavior is important for scientific models so that scientists are aware of the basis of predictions from the AI models. The project work by Gleich will be done in partnership with the Oak Ridge National Labs. Xie is partnering with Los Alamos National Laboratory and the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory. Five other Purdue faculty are part of Genesis Mission awards led by other institutions: David Nolte, the Edward M. Purcell Distinguished Professor of Physics and Astronomy, regarding AI workflow for critical minerals in heterogeneous geosystems Laura J. Pyrak-Nolte, Distinguished Professor of Physics and Astronomy, in two projects: One involving neural operators for rapid multiphysics simulation of enhanced geothermal systems, and a second focused on a physics-informed multimodal model for fracture evolution in the upper crust Xipeng Shen, professor of electrical and computer engineering, regarding an LLM workflow for code generation and optimization on emerging AI accelerators Joerg Appenzeller, the Barry M. and Patricia L. Epstein Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering, regarding Polaris- Angstrom-node equivalent SRAM and logic with polar materials Stylianos Chatzidakis, nuclear engineering assistant professor and associate PUR-1 director, involving AI-driven workflow with cyber-assured digital twin for SMRs and microreactors AI research is a part of the Institute of Physical Artificial Intelligence, a core component of Purdue Computes . The comprehensive Purdue Computes initiative emphasizes four key pillars of Purdue’s extensive technological and computational environment — computing departments, physical AI, quantum science and semiconductor innovation. About Purdue University Purdue University is a research institution ranked among the top 10 public universities in the United States. More than 106,000 students study at Purdue across multiple campuses, including more than 57,000 at our main campus locations in West Lafayette and Indianapolis. As a land-grant university committed to affordability and accessibility, Purdue’s main campus has frozen tuition 14 years in a row, enabling more students than ever to graduate debt-free. Media contact: Brian Huchel, bhuchel@purdue.edu Research News 5 engineering doctoral students selected as Purdue’s inaugural class of ARCS National Scholars September 3, 2026 Purdue’s high-speed propulsion lab achieves internationally recognized quality management certification August 25, 2026 33 students capture competitive NSF research fellowships; 13 achieve honorable mentions August 17, 2026 Purdue named most recognized public university in U.S., No. 4 overall in Global University Visibility rankings August 10, 2026 Purdue University 610 Purdue Mall West Lafayette, IN 47907 765-494-4600 Systemwide options Follow Us Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Instagram Youtube tiktok snapchat Systemwide options EXPLORE plus_icon West Lafayette Map Careers Center for Healthy Living Colleges and Schools Directory Entrepreneurship and Commercialization Human Resources Libraries INFORMATION plus_icon Ethics and Compliance Events Give Lost and Found Office of Engagement President Tuition Calculator RESOURCES plus_icon BoilerConnect Brightspace Current Students Faculty and Staff myPurdue Office 365 OneCampus Portal Outlook COMMUNICATION plus_icon Annual Security Report Construction Emergency Information Technology Marketing and Communications Purdue News Purdue Hotline Timely Warnings Last modified: August 12, 2026 Copyright © 2026 Purdue University. All Rights Reserved. Trademark Statement . Accessibility | EA/EO University | Integrity Statement | Free Expression | College Scorecard (ed.gov) | Privacy Policy | Contact Us 