 DOE Partners with RTI to Launch Genesis Mission Consortium | RTI Skip to Main Content RTI uses cookies to offer you the best experience online. By clicking “accept” on this website, you opt in and you agree to the use of cookies. If you would like to know more about how RTI uses cookies and how to manage them please view our Privacy Policy here . You can “opt out” or change your mind by visiting: http://optout.aboutads.info/ . Click “accept” to agree. Accept Cookie Notice RTI International Solutions Solutions RTI delivers innovation, efficiency and real-world results for government and commercial clients. Improving Processes Data and Surveys Statistics and Data Science Digital Solutions for Social Impact Training and Technical Assistance Program Evaluation Commercial Innovation Innovation Innovation for Organizations Product Portfolio Pharma and Life Sciences Improving Programs Data Modernization and Technology Research, Evaluation, & Implementation Communication Science and Strategy Research Technologies Carbon Capture Technology Acceleration Engineering R&D for Commercial and Government Clients Industrial Piloting & Scale-up Biomedical Technologies Energy Innovation & Development Environmental Exposure & Protection Advanced Materials International Development Energy for Development Environment Global Food Security, Agriculture, and Nutrition Global Health International Education Monitoring, Evaluation, Research, Learning, and Adapting (MERLA) Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) Discovery Sciences Drug Discovery and Development Analytical Laboratory Science Focus Areas Focus Areas RTI Leverages advanced analytics, data science, AI and digital systems to deliver solutions with impact. Commercialization Innovation Advisors Pharma Solutions Drug Discovery and Development Education Early Childhood K-12 Education Postsecondary Education Education Technologies STEM: Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Education Policy, Systems, and Governance Education Research Methodologies Implementation Science in Education Workforce Development International Education Literacy Health Public Health/Well-Being Behavioral Health Population Health Health Care Payment and Quality RTI Health Solutions Global Health Justice Research & Policy Community Safety, Crime Prevention, and Victimization Response Investigations and Forensic Science Justice Workforce Resilience and Standards Court Systems and Programs Corrections and Reentry Security Threats and Extremism Evidence-Based Strategies to Reduce Firearm Violence Climate, Energy, & Environment Climate Energy Air Quality Water Contaminants of Concern Sustainable Materials & Waste Management Solutions Economics & Innovation Applied Economics and Strategy Innovation for Organizations Technology Acceleration Research, Technology, and Innovation Policy Military Military Behavioral Health North Carolina Center for Optimizing Military Performance Military Health and Human Performance Military Wearables for Health and Injury Assessment Military Health System Transformation Food Security and Agriculture Food Safety Food Systems and Policy Analysis Food Loss and Waste Food Security & Food Assistance Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity Climate-Smart Agriculture Agricultural Innovation Global Food Security, Agriculture, and Nutrition Expertise Our Experts In-Depth With Our Experts Related News RTI Fellows Program Thought Leadership Expertise Impact Newsroom Insights Blog Events Publications RTI Press About the RTI Press Instructions for Authors RTI Press Collections Projects Impact About Executive Leadership Corporate Governance Commitment to Client Engagement Our History Office Locations Partner With Us Prime Contracting U.S. Government Clients and Funding Agencies Industry and Commercial Clients Foundations and Associations Bilateral Agencies and Multilateral Banks Universities and Academic Research Institutions Suppliers and Small Businesses Commitment to Quality Ethics, Human Rights, Nondiscrimination, and Human Research Protection Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Community Engagement Environmental Stewardship Open Science Initiative About Careers Explore RTI Careers Job Search Students Veterans Life at RTI Campus & Culture Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Growth and Career Development Careers Insights Blog Newsroom RTI Press Publications Partner With Us Search Mobile Menu Breadcrumb Home Newsroom DOE partners with RTI International to administer newly launched Genesis Mission Consortium via TechWerx Newsroom DOE partners with RTI International to administer newly launched Genesis Mission Consortium via TechWerx February 09, 2026 Share Share on Facebook Share on X.com Share on Linkedin Email Consortium to bring together technical capabilities and expertise to create next era in science RESEARCH TRIANGLE PARK, N.C. — The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) has launched the Genesis Mission Consortium to accelerate scientific and technological innovation in support of the Genesis Mission. Accelerated by artificial intelligence, the consortium will unite technical capabilities and expertise across sectors and will be administered by TechWerx, a DOE partnership intermediary operated by independent scientific research institute RTI International. “We are honored to administer the Genesis Mission Consortium to help reimagine how science is done in America,” said Adam Klich , TechWerx and Genesis Mission Consortium lead at RTI. “By uniting the nation’s top research assets, from supercomputers and datasets to advanced models and scientific expertise, the consortium will accelerate discovery and strengthen U.S. leadership in science and technology in areas critical to national energy and security priorities.” With dozens of federal and industry partners joining the initiative at launch, the consortium aims to accelerate breakthroughs in energy innovation, discovery science and national security by applying its capabilities to major national challenges—from advanced manufacturing and biotechnology to materials science, nuclear energy, quantum information science and semiconductors. “Our role is to provide structured partnerships between members and stakeholders,” said Amy Volckens , RTI strategic account executive. “The consortium will make it easier for companies, universities, small businesses, philanthropic funders, nonprofits, and others to participate in the Genesis Mission and collaborate with new and existing partners, ultimately accelerating the creation of new approaches to address national science and technology grand challenges and the conversion of promising technologies into real-world solutions that advance the nation’s energy, discovery science and security goals.” To drive technical advancements, the consortium will lead facilitated working groups that provide a structured, efficient teaming model for collaboration and co-creation under future project agreements: • AI model development and validation • Data integration and standards • High-performance computing and cloud infrastructure • Robotics and automation The consortium will also host major events throughout the year, including annual member meetings, workshops and technology showcases, giving members valuable opportunities to connect, collaborate and share innovations. Learn more about the Genesis Mission Consortium About TechWerx TechWerx is a DOE supported innovation hub managed by RTI International through a Partnership Intermediary Agreement. The hub is dedicated to driving collaboration across the energy and national security ecosystems to accelerate the transition and impact of energy-focused science and technology solutions, ultimately enhancing America's economic and energy security landscape. For more information visit, www.techwerx.org . About RTI International RTI International is an independent scientific research institute dedicated to improving the human condition. Our vision is to address the world's most critical problems with technical and science-based solutions in pursuit of a better future. Clients rely on us to answer questions that demand an objective and multidisciplinary approach—one that integrates expertise across social, statistical, data, and laboratory sciences, engineering, and other technical disciplines to solve the world’s most challenging problems. For more information, visit www.rti.org . Meet the Experts Amy Volckens Strategic Account Executive Media Info RTI International Media Relations: news@rti.org As an independent, scientific research institute with a mission to improve the human condition, RTI International is engaged by clients and partners to conduct evidence-based research and project implementation. We share our work in line with journalistic and scientific standards and maintain a record in RTI’s Newsroom. RTI International is an independent scientific research institute dedicated to improving the human condition. Our vision is to address the world's most critical problems with technical and science-based solutions in pursuit of a better future. Clients rely on us to answer questions that demand an objective and multidisciplinary approach—one that integrates expertise across social, statistical, data, and laboratory sciences, engineering, and other technical disciplines to solve the world’s most challenging problems. For more information, visit www.rti.org . Enter Keyword... Submit Featured Announcement RTI International supports development of Alabama S&T Plan update September 04, 2026 Insights Data Centers Need Shared, Evidence-Based Solutions September 03, 2026 Insights Building Suicide Prevention Into the EHR: A Critical Tool for Zero Suicide Implementation September 03, 2026 Insights How to Improve Rural Health by Investing in Transportation and Other Resources September 01, 2026 Impact Understanding the Lifelong Consequences of Incarcerating Youth in Adult Facilities August 27, 2026 Announcement RTI International, CDM Smith to evaluate microplastic testing methods for drinking water August 26, 2026 Announcement RTI collects, analyzes data for U.S. News & World Report 2026-27 Best High Schools rankings August 18, 2026 Announcement Chuck Stevens named president of RTI Health Solutions August 24, 2026 Impact Water Modeling Solutions for Wake County's One Water Plan August 12, 2026 Insights Natural Food Dyes: What Food Companies Need to Know Before Making the Switch August 12, 2026 Popular search terms Water Research Partner With Us U.S. Government Commercial Foundations & Associations Multilateral Donors Universities Suppliers Site Privacy Policy Security Policy Site Map Glossary Terms of Use Accessibility Contact Us Search the site Submit Search Contact Us delivering the promise of science for global good © 2026 RTI International. RTI International is a trade name of Research Triangle Institute. RTI and the RTI logo are U.S. registered trademarks of Research Triangle Institute. 