 DOE Genesis Mission | DoResearch Skip to main content Stanford University Menu Who We Are About VPDoR The Office of the Vice Provost and Dean of Research (VPDoR) recommends and promulgates new research policies and oversees implementation. About VPDoR VPDoR Teams Budget and Finance Facilities Faculty and Academic Affairs Human Resources & Academic Staff Research Program IT Strategy and Services Research Administration & Compliance Research Alliance Relations Research Development Research Policy and Integrity Shared Research Platforms Independent Laboratories, Centers, and Institutes Research Offices Policies Our Policies Find research laws, regulations, and policies. Read more about Our Policies Popular Policies Policy on Conflict of Interest and Conflict of Commitment Health and Safety: Principles, Responsibilities and Practices Visiting Scholars Visiting Student Researchers Research Policy Handbook Resources Resources Explore resources that help enable research. Read more about our Resources Research Categories Award Management Conflict of Interest Data Export Controls Financial Concepts International Proposals Regulatory Compliance Glossary Funding Proposal Preparation & Submission From research funding within Stanford to external opportunities, VPDoR provides search tools, proposal resources, and guidance to support your journey from idea to implementation. Read more about Funding Find Funding Funding Search Tools Limited Submissions Opportunities Portal Elevate Your Proposal Support From The Research Development Office VPDoR Institutional Support Funds Tips For Selected Funding Programs Search Search Stanford Research Development Office DOE Genesis Mission Menu About About RDO FAQs FAQs about RDO FAQs about Limited Submissions FAQs about VPDoR Managed Funding Testimonials Related Offices Services Proposal Development Support Consultations Resubmission Support Pre-Submission Peer Review (Red Team) Support for Contacting Program Officers Support for Early Career Faculty News & Events Newsletters Events Finding Funding Funding Search Resources Databases Curated Lists Sponsor Profiles VPDoR-Managed Funding Propel Grants Grant Booster International Research Exploration Grants About Limited Submissions Writing Your Proposal Navigating Grant Preparation at Stanford Resources for Selected Funding Programs DOE Genesis Mission NSF Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) Guidance for Writing Proposal Sections General Grant Preparation Tips & Resources Grantsmanship Tips Resources for Collaboration & Team Science Data & Statistics For Proposals What Makes a Successful Proposal On this page Most recent content update: April 20, 2026 Scroll down for details on Stanford support for proposals by the Research Development Office (RDO). Recent amendments to DE-FOA-0003612 (latest version linked here ) 1. DOE extended the deadline for FY26. Submission Deadline for Phase I Applications and Phase II Letters of Intent is now May 1, 2026. 2. DOE updated its application guidance. The agency now very strongly encourages a single application from a lead institution with proposed subawardee(s) rather than multiple collaborative submissions. Stanford OSR advises that the lead PI will need to determine whether shifting to a single‑lead model is feasible for their team, in consultation with their administrators. The Stanford-SLAC Partner Search google form (must be logged in with SUNet ID to access) also remains active with people offering and seeking partnerships from the Stanford-SLAC ecosystem. Program Snapshot DOE is interested in receiving applications from interdisciplinary teams addressing the Genesis Mission National Science and Technology Challenges to accelerate scientific discovery and R&D workflows using novel AI models and frameworks. By achieving AI advantage, these teams will advance the DOE's mission and ensure America's security and prosperity by addressing energy, environmental, and nuclear challenges through science and technology. DOE is soliciting new FY26 Phase I small team and Phase II large team applications in the following topic areas: advanced manufacturing, biotechnology, critical materials, nuclear fission, nuclear fusion, quantum information science, semiconductors and microelectronics, discovery science, and energy. Both Phase I and II awards are available; a Phase I award is not a prerequisite for applying for a Phase II in this or future rounds. Multi-institutional teams are required. Phase I awards are small team awards from $500k-$750k over 9 months. Teams must have at least two of the following : 1) DOE/NNSA national laboratory, 2) industry, 3) institute of higher education. Phase II awards are large team awards anticipated to be 3-5 times that of Phase I in dollar amount, over 3 years. Teams must have at least one DOE/NNSA national laboratory partner and one industry partner. Inclusion of institutes of higher education is strongly encouraged but not required. Key information from DOE: Notice of Funding Opportunity Genesis webinar registrations and/or recordings for upcoming and past RFA and topical informational sessions March 26-April 21 Answers to FAQs are linked from this page (under Genesis RFA), please check back regularly for updated versions More information: Genesis Mission webpage DOE's Genesis Partnership Exchange for teaming Genesis Mission National Science & Technology Challenges Executive Order launching the Genesis Mission Stanford Limited Submissions Details This is a Limited Submission funding opportunity. An institution-wide internal selection process is required prior to proposal submission to DOE. Only one application per focus area may be submitted by any one organization as the lead institution. The internal deadline was March 30 . More information on the selection and submission process is available through the Stanford Funding Opportunities portal . Open slots have moved to a first-come, first-served process . Submit a Notice of Interest here (link coming soon). Status of internal competition for the various topic areas can be checked here (SUNet ID required). For questions about the limited submissions process, email limitedsubmissions@stanford.edu Timeline March 26, 2026 : Informational webinar from DOE ( link to recording ) March 30, 2026 : Internal application due to VPDoR Limited Submissions (details above) April 28, 2026 : May 1, 2026 : Phase I applications and Phase II LOIs from internally selected teams due to DOE May 19, 2026: Phase II applications from internally selected teams due to DOE Stanford support for proposals The Stanford Research Development Office (RDO) provides proposal development support: Resources List of focus areas at-a-glance (with internal selection status) (SUNet ID required) to help you identify which slots are still open and which have been assigned. Stanford-SLAC Partner Search google form (SUNet ID required) to help you meet the Genesis Mission RFA requirement for multi-institutional teams that include at least two out of the three following categories: (1) DOE National Lab or Scientific User Facility, (2) Institution of Higher Education, (3) Industry. Fill out the google form linked above to offer and/or ask for key expertise or capabilities and get access to other entries. Matching is a self-driven process due to the compressed timeline. Phase I Project Narrative outline (SUNet ID required) to help you write a proposal that addresses all required elements Proposal review and feedback RDO is available to help Stanford PIs craft a compelling proposal as part of our services . Given the high volume of Genesis applications and limited time frame, we will focus our support for this particular opportunity on review/feedback of the project narrative for responsiveness to the call and the review criteria. Support will be tailored based on proposal needs, timing of the support request, and RDO staff availability. We invite teams to contact us as soon as possible to discuss proposal support. We will prioritize requests received by April 16, 2026 given the standard OSR 5-day deadline ( policy information ). Contact RDO Director Kim Baeten to discuss potential support. Created: 03/18/26 Updated: 04/21/26 Announcements Log in Stanford University Stanford Home Search Stanford Maps & Directions Emergency Info Terms of Use Privacy Copyright Trademarks Non-Discrimination Accessibility © Stanford University. Stanford, California 94305. Feedback Feedback Please login to provide feedback, report a bug, or contact site administrators. Back to Top 