 Nokia Corporation | Nokia Search all of Nokia More from Nokia Speak now Solutions Solutions Solutions Solutions Discover the advanced connectivity delivered by AI-powered network solutions with high performance and security. All backed by the trusted expertise to help you design, deploy and operate across fixed, mobile and transport networks. AI and cloud providers Scale the interconnection and operations of your network infrastructure with advanced optical, IP and datacenter switching technologies that help maximize the return on your AI investments. Mission-critical enterprises Advancing connectivity to secure the mission-critical environment in the AI era. Telecommunication providers Stay ahead in the AI supercycle with AI-native networks. AI and cloud providers AI and cloud providers Advanced connectivity unlocks the full potential of your AI and cloud infrastructure. Explore our solutions for AI and cloud Data center networking Data center switches Event-driven automation (Nokia EDA) Intra-data center optics (ICE-D) Data center interconnection Data center gateway Data center connectivity IP routers IP network automation (Network Services Platform) Pluggable coherent optics (ICE-X 100G/400G) Automation and security Autonomous network fabric and apps Cybersecurity (XDR and Cyberdome) DDoS detection and mitigation (Deepfield) Digital operations center Quantum-safe networks Mission-critical enterprises Mission-critical enterprises Operate securely with high-performance connectivity. Explore our solutions for mission-critical enterprises Defense Data center networking for defense Tactical communications solutions Nokia Federal Solutions (US) Energy Mining Oil and gas Power utilities Renewable energy Enterprise and industrial campus Arenas and venues Financial services Manufacturing Private networks Public sector Connected territories Healthcare Public safety Research and education Transportation Aviation Highways Ports Railways Supply chain and logistics Telecommunication providers Telecommunication providers Stay ahead in the AI supercycle with AI-native networks. Explore our solutions for telecommunication providers Fixed access Access controller (Altiplano) Fiber access ONTs and OLTs – 10G, 25G, 50G, 100G PON Home connectivity suite (Corteca) Mobile access Radio access Autonomous network fabric and apps Core networks Network security Services for mobile networks Transport Data center gateway DDoS security and analytics (Deepfield) IP network automation IP routing, switching and aggregation IP network security Optical data center interconnect Optical transport Optical network automation Quantum-safe networks Explore our solution areas: Autonomous networks Broadband access Core networks Data center networks IP networks Microwave transport Multimedia technologies Network APIs Network security Optical networks Radio access networks Insights and innovation Insights and innovation Insights and innovation Insights and innovation Get expert insights so you can break down the barriers that are holding you back. Nokia Bell Labs Explore Bell Labs' century of innovation, from pioneering the transistor, shaping communications to driving future technologies with real-world impact. Blog Discover networking innovations transforming the world. Standardization We are spearheading global technology standards for a safer, modern world In this section: Insights and innovation Blog Nokia Bell Labs Standardization Technical Advisory Board Partner with us Partner with us Partner with us Partner with us Let's shape the future of connectivity together. Nokia partners Working together to seize more opportunities in the AI era. Innovate with Nokia Shaping the future of connectivity together Patent licensing Build on our patents to make innovative products. In this section: Nokia partners Innovate with Nokia Patent licensing NGP Capital We are Nokia We are Nokia We are Nokia We are Nokia Nokia is advancing connectivity for the AI era, bringing global leadership across fixed, mobile, and transport networks. Newsroom Multimedia-rich media hub showcasing the latest news and insights from across Nokia. Careers Expand your bubble and search for opportunities. Events Explore upcoming and past events. In this section: About Nokia Careers Events Investors Leadership and governance Newsroom Sustainability Responsible business Select your country We have limited content available for some countries. Find office information and country specific information through our country hub. Worldwide (English) Suomi (Finland) Offices and country specific information Back Main content Nokia defines the next era of radio with the industry's first AI-native RAN platform Watch our Summer launch Modern data centers that supercharge AI Discover the critical role of the network Autonomous Networks Explore networks that sense, think, act Broadband access networks See our broadband services AI-RAN Summer launch Modern data center networks Autonomous Networks Broadband access networks Advancing connectivity for the AI supercycle AI and cloud providers Scale faster with advanced optical and IP connectivity. Discover solutions for AI and cloud providers Telecommunication providers Evolving networks to deliver high performance, secure connectivity ready to seize the opportunities of AI. Discover our mobile, fixed and transport solutions Mission critical enterprises​ Operate securely with high-performance connectivity. Discover connectivity solutions Explore innovative ways to transform your business The future of telecom Learn from today’s telecom leaders shaping next-gen networks and cloud. Artificial intelligence Build AI-powered networks that meet the demands of AI applications. Autonomous Networks Suite Autonomous networks built for the AI era. MantaRay SMO AI-powered Service Management and Orchestration for Autonomous RAN. anyRAN The widest choice of strategic options for the RAN evolution of mobile network operators and enterprises. See our network solutions Transforming the future of connectivity and beyond Find more about Nokia Bell Labs Explore the latest from Nokia Why Digital Air Traffic Management Depends on the Communications Network Beneath It More insights From prediction to action: The next leap in AI-driven network care More from our blog Transforming UK connectivity with VodafoneThree and Nokia’s 5G innovation More customer successes Latest news 8 Sep 2026 Nokia launches industry-first initiative to help operators accelerate network innovation in the AI era 3 Sep 2026 Nokia and BeeHealthy bring network-based verification to digital healthcare 1 Sep 2026 Nokia opens new research and development center in Saudi Arabia to accelerate AI-powered network automation 18 Aug 2026 Nokia ranked No. 1 for mobile core portfolio competitiveness in Omdia’s 2026 market landscape report 6 Aug 2026 Indosat, Ooredoo Group, Nokia, and NVIDIA launch Zankore by Indosat, ready to serve the region with full stack AI infra platform 23 Jul 2026 Nokia provides recast comparative financial information reflecting the presentation of Fixed Wireless Access CPE and Enterprise Campus Edge businesses as discontinued operations More in our newsroom Footer Menu One Solutions for: AI and cloud providers Mission critical enterprises Telecommunication providers Footer Menu Three Insights Blog Learning at Nokia Nokia Bell Labs Technology explained Standardization Webinars Footer Menu Five We are Nokia Newsroom Careers Investors Sustainability Customer success Contact us Extranet access Find a partner Support Contact us Extranet access Find a partner Support Subscribe for our latest news Looking for Nokia licensed products support? Explore consumer devices Looking for Nokia licensed products support? Explore consumer devices ©2026 Nokia all rights reserved Cookies Privacy notice Terms of use Inclusive terminology Modern slavery statement 