 Department of Energy's Genesis Mission selects Tulane team using AI to discover next-generation superconductors Skip to main content Search the Tulane site Request Info Visit Apply Give to Tulane Alumni Search Menu Information for Information for ALUMNI AND FRIENDS CURRENT STUDENTS FACULTY & STAFF PARENTS & FAMILIES VISITORS Request Info Visit Apply Give to Tulane Alumni University Info Primary Navigation News TULANIAN MAGAZINE Experts EVENTS PRESS RELEASES Account Login Account Login EMAIL GIBSON ONLINE MYTULANE Breadcrumb Home Home PR PR Department of Energy's Genesis Mission Selects Tulane Team Using AI To Discover Next-generation Superconductors Department of Energy's Ge... Department of Energy's Genesis Mission selects Tulane team using AI to discover next-generation superconductors July 22, 2026 3:28 PM | Stacey Plaisance splaisance@tulane.edu Jianwei Sun, who earned his master’s degree and PhD from Tulane and has conducted research at the university for more than two decades, is leading a team selected by the U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission to develop an AI-driven approach for discovering next-generation superconductors and quantum materials. (Photo by Paula Burch-Celentano) For more than a century, scientists have searched for superconductors that could one day make the nation’s electrical grid more efficient, improve MRIs and other medical imaging technologies, and advance quantum computing. But discovering new superconductors has long been one of the field’s biggest challenges, often requiring years of laboratory experiments and trial and error. Now, a Tulane University-led research team is working to dramatically accelerate the search for next-generation superconductors — materials that allow electrical currents to flow without resistance, eliminating energy lost as heat. Tulane was among the teams selected by the U.S. Department of Energy to receive Phase I proof-of-concept funding through the Genesis Mission , a national initiative to harness AI for breakthroughs in energy dominance, discovery science and national security. The announcement was made July 22 at the Genesis Mission Summit in Washington, D.C. “What makes this project especially exciting is its interdisciplinary team. Physicists, chemists, AI researchers and experimental scientists are working together on a problem that none of us could solve alone.” — Jianwei Sun During the approximately nine-month Phase I period, the selected teams will build their AI-driven research frameworks, generate initial results and demonstrate the feasibility of their approaches. DOE will then select a smaller group of awardees for Phase II deployment projects, which could provide multiyear awards ranging from $6 million to $15 million. Tulane’s interdisciplinary team will develop a workflow combining artificial intelligence, high-fidelity quantum-mechanical simulations and laboratory experiments to accelerate the discovery of new superconductors and quantum materials for future energy and quantum technologies. The AI-driven workflow will learn from quantum-mechanical calculations and experimental measurements to identify the most promising materials and determine which calculations and experiments to perform next. “Discovering a new quantum material is extraordinarily difficult because the number of possible compositions and atomic structures is almost limitless,” said Jianwei Sun , the project’s principal investigator and a professor of physics and engineering physics at Tulane University School of Science and Engineering . “By combining high-fidelity quantum-mechanical calculations, physics-aware AI and experimental measurements, we want to create a scientific workflow that learns continuously and directs researchers toward the most promising possibilities.” While superconductors can carry electrical current with no resistance, they must be cooled to extremely low temperatures, making them costly and difficult to use outside of specialized settings. A superconductor that operates at substantially higher temperatures could contribute to a more efficient and resilient electrical grid, improved medical imaging systems, more powerful magnets, energy-efficient data centers, advanced transportation technologies, quantum computing and fusion energy. Unlike generative AI systems trained on language, the Tulane team’s AI will be built on scientific data from high-fidelity quantum-mechanical calculations and experimental measurements, with the laws of physics incorporated directly into the model. “Our AI is not a chatbot,” said Aron Culotta , a Tulane professor whose work focuses on artificial intelligence and machine learning. “Instead of learning patterns in language, it will learn patterns in atoms, electrons, magnetism and atomic vibrations that can help predict how a material will behave.” “There is still no general theory of high-temperature superconductivity,” said Ruiqi Zhang, a research assistant professor in Tulane University’s Department of Physics and Engineering Physics , who helped develop the project’s computational framework. “Combining high-fidelity quantum-mechanical simulations, experimental data and physics-informed AI could provide a new pathway for discovering superconductors and quantum materials.” The computational predictions will be tested through laboratory experiments. Daniel B. Straus , an assistant professor of chemistry at Tulane School of Science and Engineering, whose research focuses on materials chemistry, will help connect the team’s predictions with materials that can be synthesized and studied at Tulane. The Tulane researchers are also collaborating with Huibo Cao of Oak Ridge National Laboratory, where neutron-scattering experiments will help determine the crystal and magnetic structures of selected materials and test the team’s predictions. The project brings together researchers in theoretical and computational physics, artificial intelligence, materials chemistry, data science, high-performance computing and experimental science. “What makes this project especially exciting is its interdisciplinary team,” said Sun, who earned his master’s degree and PhD from Tulane, where he has conducted research for more than two decades. “Physicists, chemists, AI researchers and experimental scientists are working together on a problem that none of us could solve alone.” Other Related Articles Summer upgrades prepare Tulane’s uptown campus for the academic year Decoding the colors of Commencement Tulane strengthens neighborhood connections at annual community meeting Q&A: Head Coach Will Hall previews the 2026 football season Tulane unveils new mobile command vehicle to strengthen emergency response Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118 504-865-5000 Footer Menu II JOBS AT TULANE Privacy Accessibility Copyright 