 UC Berkeley College of Chemistry awarded DOE Genesis Mission grant | College of Chemistry Skip to main content Toggle navigation College of Chemistry Search Terms Submit Search The College The central mission of the College of Chemistry is to advance society through education and research , and we have made it our responsibility to fulfill this mission, year in and year out, for more than 140 years. Overview College Leadership History Facts Centers & Institutes Major Awards & Honors Endowed Lectureships Endowed Chairs & Professorships Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Belonging Rankings Academics Our two departments provide fundamental and applied studies of an outstanding caliber. The remarkable breadth and depth of resources available to our students readies them as chemists and chemical engineers to address society’s most urgent 21st-century issues. Overview Undergraduate Majors/Degrees Prospective Undergraduates Undergraduate Student Services CBE Graduate Programs Chemistry Graduate Programs Master's Programs Visiting Students Faculty & Research College faculty have been leaders at the frontiers of knowledge since 1872. Current pioneering research includes premier programs in catalysis, thermodynamics, chemical biology, atmospheric chemistry, the development of polymer, optical and semiconductor materials, and nanoscience, among others. Overview Chemistry Faculty Chemistry Research CBE Faculty CBE Research Research Facilities News Check out College of Chemistry news articles and featured videos, as well as our biannual college magazine, Catalyst . Overview News Press Coverage Catalyst Magazine Impact Report Featured Videos Student Stories Events Connect The College of Chemistry is consistently ranked as one of the best places on earth to learn, teach, and create new tools in the chemical sciences. This is no accident. It’s the direct result of exceptional scholarship as well as thousands and thousands of donations from our loyal alumni and friends. Overview Advisory Board Donors Impact Report Giving Secondary navigation Chemistry Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering Quick Links Quick Links Admin & Support Emergency Info Building Access Facilities Operations College Directory Research Safety College Library Seminars & Events Contact Us Single Sign-On Apps Home UC Berkeley College of Chemistry awarded DOE Genesis Mission grant UC Berkeley College of Chemistry awarded DOE Genesis Mission grant July 24, 2026 College of Chemistry Press Release Image courtesy of Hartwig Lab As the U.S. Department of Energy launches phase one of its Genesis Mission: Transforming Science and Energy with AI , a national initiative harnessing artificial intelligence and advanced computing to accelerate scientific discovery, research teams from the UC Berkeley’s College of Chemistry have been awarded funding to lead the federal initiative to double scientific productivity through artificial intelligence. Out of thousands of proposals nationwide, the College was selected as one of just 278 teams awarded funding under the U.S. Department of Energy’s historic Genesis Mission. Lead researcher John F. Hartwig , Dow Professor of Sustainable Chemistry at UC Berkeley’s College of Chemistry, plans, in this program, to use artificial intelligence to accelerate the discovery and understanding of catalysts for a more energy efficient chemical industry. The project tackles a major bottleneck in green chemistry: how to design better catalysts – the molecular engines behind nearly all plastics, fuels, and medicines – using AI, even when chemical data is extremely scarce. Every day, energy-intensive chemical manufacturing powers our modern economy, producing the essential plastics, fuels, and industrial materials we rely on. Professor Hartwig’s team has pioneered some of the most widely used catalytic processes, discovering cleaner chemical reactions that drastically reduce the extreme heat, pressure, and energy required to make and break down complex molecules. Now, through the DOE’s Genesis Mission, the Hartwig team is preparing to tackle automating the science behind catalysts. Conducted in partnership with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and Cornell University, the project leverages multi-institutional expertise to translate AI catalyst predictions into real-world energy savings. While standard AI usually fails when data is scarce, the team hopes to solve chemistry’s “small data” problem. By combining two pretrained models: a large language model and a 3D quantum-physics model (trained on 500M+ calculations), the framework will be able to predict and design custom catalysts for industrial reactions using fewer lab measurements. Combining text knowledge with 3D structures will allow the AI framework to learn from small experimental datasets and explain why a catalyst works, allowing it to accurately predict cleaner chemical reactions. This breakthrough helps transform slow, trial-and-error chemistry into a fast, precise science. “Addressing the world’s most urgent energy challenges requires rethinking how we synthesize and recycle materials at the molecular level,” said Interim Dean Anne Baranger. “By combining Professor Hartwig’s work with advanced AI, we are turning traditional trial-and-error chemistry into predictive science that accelerates discoveries for efficient, industrial use of chemical feedstocks.” Read more about the Genesis Mission projects Topics Artificial Intelligence topic page Catalysis topic page Computational Science topic page Green Chemistry topic page Sustainable Chemistry topic page Advancing society through education and research COLLEGE OF CHEMISTRY 420 Latimer Hall University of California Berkeley, CA 94720-1460 (510) 642-5060 Map Undergraduate Student Services 121 Gilman Hall University of California Berkeley, CA 94720-1460 (510) 664-5264 Dept of Chemistry Graduate Office 419 Latimer Hall University of California Berkeley, CA 94720-1460 (510) 642-5882 Dept of CHEMICAL & BIOMOLECULAR ENGINEERING Graduate Office 201 Gilman Hall University of California Berkeley, CA 94720-1462 (510) 642-2291 Administration & Support Admin, Finance, Technology Building Access College Relations Contact Us Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, & Belonging Facilities Operations & Research Safety Information for Staff Information Technology Jobs Shipping & Receiving Staff Directory Website Update Request UC Berkeley Berkeley Website Berkeley News Campus Leadership Campus Events Campus Map Visiting Berkeley Follow us: Facebook X (formerly Twitter) LinkedIn YouTube Instagram Powered by Open Berkeley Accessibility Statement Nondiscrimination Policy Statement Privacy Statement Copyright © 2026 UC Regents; all rights reserved Back to Top 