 UC San Diego Receives Department of Energy Genesis Mission Award to Fund New Scientific AI Tools story Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute Physical Sciences San Diego Supercomputer Center Artificial Intelligence --> Skip to main content Menu UC San Diego Subscribe Research People Campus & Community Arts & Culture Voices UC San Diego Receives Department of Energy Genesis Mission Award to Fund New Scientific AI Tools Story by: Michelle Franklin - m1franklin@ucsd.edu Tiffany Fox - tmfox@ucsd.edu Published Date August 21, 2026 Story by: Michelle Franklin - m1franklin@ucsd.edu Tiffany Fox - tmfox@ucsd.edu Share This: Share this story on Linkedin Share this story on Facebook Share this story on Threads Share this story on Twitter Share this story via email Article Content University of California San Diego researchers will lead one of the Department of Energy’s (DOE) new Genesis Mission projects focused on accelerating fundamental physics and quantum computing by deploying intelligent AI agents. Aobo Li, an assistant professor in the Department of Physics and the Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute (HDSI) at the Halıcıoğlu School of Data Science and Computing, is the principal investigator (PI) on the project. A team of experts will build SIDERIUS, an AI scientist that can analyze data, design AI models, and deploy them onto specialized chips for applications in fundamental physics and quantum computing. Associate Professor of Physics Yi-Zhuang You is co-PI on the project. EdenCode, an AI company founded by You and alumna Wanda Hou, is a subawardee on the project. “The next frontier of AI for science is learning how to translate scientific challenges into a form that AI can solve effectively,” said Li. “This DOE award allows us to bring together an interdisciplinary team in a way that wasn’t previously possible. Our vision is to translate challenges in physics and quantum computing into AI-ready tasks that can be tackled by SIDERIUS, our LLM agent system. Our long-term vision is to build a general AI framework that can be adapted to many other data-intensive scientific domains.” In addition to this project, Li and several other UC San Diego researchers are co-PIs on four projects led by other institutions. These projects, listed below, will support the creation of AI tools that can meaningfully impact the way science is conducted and the rate at which discoveries are made. Co-PIs Javier Duarte (associate professor of physics) and Daniel Diaz (computational data science and research specialist) will work with the University of Colorado Boulder to develop ultra-fast AI tools that can process enormous rates of data input during particle collisions at CERN’s Large Hadron Collider. Co-PI Li will work with UNC Chapel Hill to deploy AI agents and surrogate models to automate and speed up optical simulations for LENGED, an experimental collaboration that will lead the effort to search for neutrinoless double beta decay, an extremely rare process that, if discovered, would explain why the universe has more matter than antimatter. Co-PIs Liang Yang (professor of physics) and Li will work with the University of Hawaii to build a unified foundation model based on AI-ready datasets from five different neutrinoless double beta decay experiments – CUORE, EXO-200, Majorana Demonstrator, NEXT and SuperNEMO. Co-PI Li will collaborate with Pacific Northwest National Laboratory to develop ultra-fast AI tools that identify and preserve neutrinoless double-beta decay signals while rejecting unwanted background noises from the LEGEND detector in real time. Related content About the Genesis Mission The Genesis Mission brings together DOE’s world-class scientific capabilities, advanced AI, high-performance computing, and the nation’s leading researchers to transform how scientific discovery is conducted and strengthen American leadership in science and technology. The 278 awards will support research to address some of the nation’s most pressing energy, scientific and engineering challenges, including in nuclear energy, critical mineral extraction, intelligent chip design and commercial fusion energy. With more than 5,000 submissions, less than 6% of applicants received an award. The DOE called it “the largest response to a funding opportunity in DOE history.” Aobo Li attended July's Genesis Mission Summit in Washington D.C. The number of Genesis projects UC San Diego is a part of underscores the university’s deep bench of AI expertise. “AI is impacting scientific discovery in fundamental ways,” said Rajesh K. Gupta, dean of the Halıcıoğlu School. “The Halıcıoğlu School is proud to assemble a team across Physics, Data Science and Supercomputing at UC San Diego in an institutional architecture that is uniquely matched to The Genesis Mission. SIDERIUS will drive research in physics through new AI tools and methodologies that are bound to significantly advance our understanding of nature and invent new applications.” Learn more about research and education at UC San Diego in: Artificial Intelligence Read more news about: Physical Sciences , Artificial Intelligence Share This: Share this story on Linkedin Share this story on Facebook Share this story on Threads Share this story on Twitter Share this story via email You May Also Like Meet the Next Wave of Entrepreneurs Joining the StartBlue Ocean Enterprise Accelerator Program Science & Environment Members of the Scripps scientific diving course lowering a small boat into the ocean from Scripps Pier. Dissecting the Argument: A New Book Teaches Critical Reading Skills for Science Science & Environment A New Generation of Pharmacists Begin Their Journey Milestones Surf’s Up: How the Seafloor Shapes Breaking Waves Science & Environment Stay in the Know Keep up with all the latest from UC San Diego. Subscribe to the newsletter today. Email Please provide a valid email address. Subscribe Subscription Notification Close Confirmation Thank you! You have been successfully subscribed to the UC San Diego Today Newsletter. Contact Information 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0021 (858) 534-2230 Site Directory Media Resources & Contacts Newsletter Emergency Status Disability Resources Principles of Community Organizational Transformation University Communications Key Issues Follow Us on Social Media UC San Diego Linkedin Account UC San Diego Instagram Account UC San Diego Twitter Account UC San Diego Facebook Account UC San Diego Youtube Account UC San Diego Tiktok Account UC San Diego Threads Account UC San Diego Blue sky Account Divisions & Schools Arts and Humanities Biological Sciences Division of Extended Studies Division of Graduate Education and Postdoctoral Affairs Division of Undergraduate Education Halıcıoğlu School of Data Science and Computing Jacobs School of Engineering Physical Sciences Rady School of Management School of Global Policy & Strategy School of Medicine Scripps Institution of Oceanography Skaggs School of Pharmacy Social Sciences Wertheim School of Public Health © 2021 Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved. Terms of Use | Accessibility | Privacy | Feedback Category navigation with Social links Close Research Research Back The Arts Business & Economics Health & Behavior Humanities Politics & Society Science & Environment Technology & Engineering All Research Collapse Research navigation People People Back Awards & Accolades In Memoriam Milestones Profiles All People Collapse People navigation Campus & Community Campus & Community Back At Work Athletics Campus News Giving Student Life All Campus & Community Collapse Campus & Community navigation Arts & Culture Arts & Culture Back Books & Culture Events & Happenings Visual & Performing Arts All Arts & Culture Collapse Arts & Culture navigation Voices Voices Back Insights & Experts Opinion Q&A All Voices Collapse Voices navigation Visual Storytelling Visual Storytelling For Media: Media Resources & Contacts Publications: UC San Diego Today Newsletter UC San Diego Magazine Discoveries Magazine Other News: UC San Diego Health Follow Us: UC San Diego Linkedin Account UC San Diego Instagram Account UC San Diego Twitter Account UC San Diego Facebook Account UC San Diego Youtube Account UC San Diego Tiktok Account UC San Diego Threads Account UC San Diego Blue sky Account Close Close Search UC San Diego Today Include Department News 