 Medical Radioisotopes Supplier | Radioisotope Production Company Company Leadership Medical Iso Advisory Board Strategic Advisory Board West Valley City Technology HALEU Direct Metallization HALEU HALEU Knowledge Center Life Sci Medical Isotopes R&D Collaboration Contact Sales About Nuclear Med Batteries News Press Releases Nu-Blog Video Podcast Media Kit Email Sign Up Careers NOW HIRING Mission & Values Life in Utah Careers Email Select Page Accelerating Energy Solutions Nusano’s technologies are capable of producing HALEU fuel for next-generation energy platforms and powering advanced batteries HALEU Supplying the Fight Against Cancer Nusano’s patented technologies and methods are poised to transform radioisotope production and help usher in an exciting new era in health care LIFE SCIENCES Powering New Frontiers Nuclear batteries provide always-on power for applications across land, sea, air and space. Batteries physics powering futures At Nusano, we don’t rewrite the laws of physics. We use physics to rewrite possibilities. Nusano is committed to bringing stability and innovation to the rapidly emerging and critically undersupplied medical radioisotopes market. We’ve developed a process that is more efficient than existing technologies to reliably produce radioisotopes at the heart of next-generation cancer treatments and diagnosis techniques. Radioisotopes are essential components in the active pharmaceutical ingredients (API) of a category of new and emerging cancer therapies, known as radiotherapeutics. Existing supply chains for these treatment-enabling resources are often strained, posing a risk to patient care, clinical trials, and ongoing drug development. Nusano’s role in the health care ecosystem is as a supplier of medical radioisotopes to drugmakers, hospitals and clinics. With a reliable supply of radioisotopes, these teams can then formulate treatments and next-generation pharmaceuticals needed to advance the fight against cancer. TECHNOLOGY A new way to produce radioisotopes Radioisotopes have been used in healthcare and industrial applications for decades. But today, the supply often doesn’t meet the need. That’s where Nusano comes in. Nusano is combining time-tested methods with our own breakthrough, patented particle acceleration technology, so we can produce radioisotopes quickly, efficiently, and affordably. Together with industry leaders, Nusano is working to supply and enable multiple billion-dollar industries to improve the quality of life for people around the world. BREAKTHROUGHS PRODUCTION WEST VALLEY CITY, UTAH Nusano is building a state-of-the-art production facility in Utah’s Salt Lake Valley. It will not only create radioisotopes needed by health care, industry and researchers, but also bring new, high-tech jobs to the area. UTAH PURPOSE Discover what drives us The people of Nusano are working to empower the world’s leading companies, health care providers, and innovators with the radioisotopes needed to advance cancer care, support modern operations, and create sustainable energy solutions. COMPANY The latest News And Updates Nusano Completes Major Milestone Toward Commercial Radioisotope Production BioSpace Previews Nusano Production Facility Utah’s Expanded Right to Try Law: A Signal for Radiopharmaceutical Innovation Nicole Vazquez Named to Utah Business Women to Watch List March 27, 2026 – BioHive Student Event @ Nusano March 12, 2026 – Wilson Sonsini Entrepreneur and Investor Life Sciences Summit Feb. 9, 2026 – BioUtah Life Sciences Day on Capitol Hill Talk Radioisotopes: 2025 Top Podcasts #1 Talk Radioisotopes: 2025 Top Podcasts #2 Talk Radioisotopes: 2025 Top Podcasts #3 DISCOVER MORE ABOUT NUSANO Sign up to receive company news and updates Supplying the fight against cancer & enabling life-changing innovations Follow Follow Follow Follow Company about us Leadership Contact us technology The Nusano Platform R&D Collaboration Resources News Careers Suppliers © 2026 Nusano | Web design Privacy Policy – Terms of Service 