 UNC Charlotte projects join the Department of Energy Genesis Mission and Student AI fellows put large language models to work - Inside UNC Charlotte Skip to main content Visit the University of North Carolina at Charlotte homepage Explore Visit the University of North Carolina at Charlotte homepage Close What can we help you find? Submit search query to search.charlotte.edu Academics Admissions Campus Life Research Athletics About Apply Visit Give News & Events Directory My UNC Charlotte Quick Links Majors & Minors Graduate Programs Calendar Campus Maps Class Registration Financial Aid Housing Library Report an Incident Resources Prospective Students Alumni & Friends Faculty & Staff Current Students Parents & Family Colleges Arts + Architecture Business Computing and Informatics Education Engineering Graduate School Health and Human Services Honors College Humanities & Earth and Social Sciences Science Inside UNC Charlotte Go to Search Page Search this site Search Main Menu Toggle News News For Faculty/Staff Student News Feature Stories Events In the Media Niner Insider Resources and Information Social Media Guidance for UNC Charlotte Faculty and Staff Key Legal and Policy Changes: What You Need to Know Immigration Changes FAQs Guidelines for Visits and Data Requests from Law Enforcement or Government Agents UNC Charlotte projects join the Department of Energy Genesis Mission and Student AI fellows put large language models to work July 27, 2026 Categories: Niner Insider UNC Charlotte projects join the Department of Energy Genesis Mission The U.S. Department of Energy has selected two UNC Charlotte projects for the first cohort of the Genesis Mission . The projects led by Stephanie Schuckers, Bank of America Distinguished Professor in Computing & Informatics, and Jinzhen Wang, assistant professor of computer science, were recently highlighted at the Genesis Mission Summit in Washington, D.C. Student AI fellows put large language models to work With AI shaping University life and operations at UNC Charlotte — and several new AI-focused majors, minors and concentrations recently launched — the Office of OneIT is empowering select students to use University-licensed large language models to solve complex departmental challenges through the Student AI Fellows program . What you need to know: Faculty and staff Academic Affairs Weekly Digest: Join the move‑in crew and help Housing and Residence Life welcome Niner Nation to campus Aug. 12‑15. Find the signup link, along with other important updates, in this week’s news digest . Board of Trustees appointment: Jon Ward ‘94 , chief executive officer of Ward Vessel and Exchanger, has been appointed to the UNC Charlotte Board of Trustees by the UNC System Board of Governors. He will complete the remainder of the term previously held by Hugh McColl. Reorganization in CCI: The College of Computing and Informatics has reorganized to adapt to the rapidly evolving technological landscape and position UNC Charlotte as a national leader in computational sciences education and research. Expert explains cyclosporiasis outbreak: Dan Janies, Carol Grotnes Belk Distinguished professor of bioinformatics and genomics and codirector for CIPHER, discusses one of the nation’s largest recorded cyclosporiasis outbreaks . New appointment: Erik Byker , professor in the Department of Reading and Elementary Education, has been appointed interim associate dean of the Honors College, effective Saturday, Aug. 1. New position: Laura Peter , executive director of intellectual property and technology transfer, was appointed deputy director general of the World Intellectual Property Organization’s Patents and Technology Sector. Measurable progress: UNC Charlotte is advancing its partnership with Power Down the Crown, supporting the city’s net‑zero‑carbon goal by 2050 while delivering measurable campus gains, including new recirculation fans in Robinson Hall that improve comfort and HVAC efficiency. Google Workspace upgrade: On Wednesday, July 29, all faculty and staff Google accounts will be upgraded to a Google Workspace for Education Plus license , bringing new advanced features to campus. WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW: STUDENTS Reorganization in CCI: The College of Computing and Informatics has reorganized to adapt to the rapidly evolving technological landscape and position UNC Charlotte as a national leader in computational sciences education and research. Expert explains cyclosporiasis outbreak: Dan Janies, the Carol Grotnes Belk Distinguished professor of bioinformatics and genomics and codirector for CIPHER, discusses one of the nation’s largest recorded cyclosporiasis outbreaks . New appointment: Erik Byker , professor in the Department of Reading and Elementary Education, as interim associate dean of the Honors College, effective Saturday, Aug. 1. Measurable progress: UNC Charlotte is advancing its partnership with Power Down the Crown, supporting the city’s net‑zero‑carbon goal by 2050 while delivering measurable campus gains, including new recirculation fans in Robinson Hall that improve comfort and HVAC efficiency. The difference is charlotte Fixxr, a mobile app created by UNC Charlotte mechanical engineering graduate Colton McComas ’26, gives drivers a clearer view of what’s going on under the hood . professional development: Faculty and staff From Burnout to Balance: UNC Charlotte Corporate Training and Executive Education is offering a free, four-part webinar series “ From Burnout to Balance ,” starting Wednesday, Sept. 16. Teaching Innovation workshops: Registration is open for The Center for Teaching and Learning Teaching Innovation Workshops . Explore new teaching innovation pathways, choose from more than 100 workshops and earn badges in teaching with AI or digital accessibility. Registration open: Join the fall 2026 cohort of Career by Design , an HR development program designed to empower Charlotte staff to take a strategic, intentional approach to their career growth. Become a sustainability ambassador: UNC Charlotte’s Sustainability Ambassador Program is a professional development program for employees to learn more about the University’s sustainability goals and practices. Become an ambassador and make a positive difference within your department and beyond. August workshops: Register for five Unleash Your Niner Potential workshops , presented by the HR learning and development team, centered around effective decision making, digital communication, customer service, networking and the art of presentation. to do list: faculty and staff Final reminder: The STEM Communication Training Program is seeking faculty reviewers to rate work produced by graduate students. Complete the faculty reviewer interest form by Wednesday, July 29, to be considered. Buy a piano: The Department of Music and the Rockley Family Foundation are hosting their annual piano sale in the lobby of Robinson Hall from Thursday, July 30, to Saturday, Aug. 1. A large selection of grand pianos, baby grands, digital player grands, upright pianos and digital pianos will be available. Nomination reminder: Nominations for the Erskine B. Bowles Staff Service Award , honoring staff whose outstanding service reflects the mission and values of the UNC System, are open through Friday, July 31. Submit your nominations: Nominations are open through Monday, Aug. 31, for the 10 Under Ten and Alumni Awards , honoring alumni who have distinguished themselves with significant professional accomplishments or extraordinary service to their communities. Connect with nature: The Botanical Gardens is offering two free signature events to help faculty and staff connect with nature. The Nature Therapy Walk is from 9 a.m. to noon, Saturday, Aug. 1, and the Gratitude in the Gardens Walk is from noon to 2 p.m., Friday, Aug. 7. Registration is required for both events. Stay informed: Review ongoing disruptions, delays and detours on campus . to do list: students Niner course pack: Most students are automatically enrolled in the Niner Course Pack textbook rental program each semester. Students registered for fall 2026 classes have until Friday, Aug. 28, to opt out . August graduates: Niner Insider is looking for graduates to participate in a questionnaire about their time at UNC Charlotte. Complete the form by Friday, July 31, for a chance to be featured in our summer commencement special edition. Buy a piano: The Department of Music and the Rockley Family Foundation are hosting their annual piano sale in the lobby of Robinson Hall from Thursday, July 30, to Saturday, Aug. 1. A large selection of grand pianos, baby grands, digital player grands, upright pianos and digital pianos will be available. Reminder: Fall 2026 tuition payments are due Wednesday, Aug. 5. Review available payment options . Stay informed: Review ongoing disruptions, delays and detours on campus . Visit the University of North Carolina at Charlotte homepage Address 9201 University City Blvd Charlotte, NC 28223 Phone 704-687-8622 Find us on Facebook Find us on Instagram Find us on LinkedIn Find us on X Find us on YouTube Resources Alumni Association Maps & Directions Parking & Transportation My UNC Charlotte Directory Library Give Partnerships Careers Contact Us Terms of Use University Policies Health & Safety Alerts Report an Incident Emergency Response Health and Safety © 2026 UNC Charlotte. All rights reserved. 