 President Garimella named to US Department of Energy advisory committee | University of Arizona News Skip to main content Search search search Search menu Menu home Home close Close Search search Main Menu News chevron_right In the News University Calendar chevron_right For Faculty & Staff chevron_right Resources for Media chevron_right Contact Us chevron_right Submit a Story Idea Subscribe Main navigation News Submenu for News All News Arizona & the Southwest Arts & Humanities Athletics Business & Economics Campus Life Government, Public Policy & Law Health & Wellness Science & Technology Social Sciences Space Strategic Imperatives University News Videos Photos In the News University Calendar Submenu for University Calendar Main Calendar Today This Week This Month Add Calendar Event Ongoing For Faculty & Staff Submenu for For Faculty & Staff Employee News UAnnounce Strategic Imperatives Awards & Accolades Clubs & Organizations Resources for Media Submenu for Resources for Media Media Guidelines & Resources News Releases Electronic Press Kits University Experts University Facts Contact Us Submenu for Contact Us Contact Us Our Team Home News President Garimella Named To US Department of Energy Advisory Committee President Garimella named to US Department of Energy advisory committee University Communications Feb. 4, 2026 Image University of Arizona President and Distinguished Professor Suresh Garimella is one of 21 individuals representing universities, national laboratories, foundations and corporations, who have been appointed to the newly established Office of Science Advisory Committee. The U.S. Department of Energy announced the appointment of University of Arizona President and Distinguished Professor Suresh Garimella to the newly established Office of Science Advisory Committee, or SCAC, an advisory body that will provide independent advice on complex scientific and technical challenges across the department's Office of Science. President Garimella is one of 21 individuals representing universities, national laboratories, foundations and corporations, who have been appointed to SCAC. He is one of only two university presidents named to the committee. "Serving the nation through engagement is central to the University of Arizona's land-grant mission, and it is something I have valued throughout my career," said Garimella. "I am honored to have been appointed to this advisory committee and look forward to this work at a critical moment for scientific and technological advancement in energy and related areas. My sincere thanks to Under Secretary Gil for the opportunity." "The establishment of SCAC underscores the department's commitment to scientific integrity and the power of partnership," said U.S. Department of Energy Under Secretary for Science Darío Gil. "By bringing together leading minds from diverse institutions, we're forging a collaborative framework that will not only enhance our scientific endeavors but also accelerate the translation of fundamental research into tangible benefits for the American people. This committee exemplifies how shared vision and collective expertise are essential for navigating the complex scientific landscape of today and tomorrow." Garimella has long had an active and influential role in national science and research policy, as both a professor and university president, including serving as a member of the National Science Board, chairing the research advisory board for Sandia National Laboratories and serving on the executive committee of the Council on Competitiveness. He also served as Jefferson Science Fellow with the U.S. Department of State and as Senior Fellow of the Energy and Climate Partnership of the Americas (ECPA). As a member of SCAC, Garimella will provide expert input to help inform priorities, improve coordination and address cross-cutting research challenges across the Office of Science, drawing on his experience as a distinguished scholar and national research leader with experience advising major science organizations and research institutions. SCAC will be chaired by Persis Drell, professor of materials science and engineering and physics at Stanford University, provost emerita of Stanford and director emerita of SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. The committee will help the Office of Science adapt to a rapidly evolving research landscape and address interdisciplinary challenges in a streamlined and flexible manner. It will also provide advice on initiatives that are priorities for the office, including the Genesis Mission, scientific discovery, fusion energy and quantum science. A full list of the 21 SCAC members is available on the U.S. Department of Energy website . Topics In the News Science & Technology Strategic Imperatives University News Tags Strategic Imperative: Research Garimella Resources for the Media Visit the Newsroom Media Contact(s) Mitch Zak Executive Director, External Communications 916-612-0979 mitchzak@arizona.edu Trending Stories Aug. 26, 2026 U of A scientists play crucial roles in Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope science, eagerly await Sunday's launch Sept. 1, 2026 Mary and Felipe M. Rodriguez commit $10M to name the U of A's Integrated Business and Engineering Program Aug. 31, 2026 New U of A tool decodes pet talk and may help explain how pets affect our well-being Sept. 4, 2026 Study: Generative AI succumbs to conversational misinformed pressure and argument University of Arizona in the News NPR Monday 'Her body temperature was 106': How heat is killing Americans in their homes The Washington Post Monday I tried the country’s first 'grounding park.' Here's what it was like. BBC Sept. 4, 2026 One half of Mars could be warmer than the other say scientists Smithsonian Magazine Sept. 2, 2026 Corals reveal El Niño events have become stronger in recent decades The New York Times Sept. 1, 2026 How monsoon season supercharged the deadly Grand Canyon flooding Contact Us Subscribe We respectfully acknowledge the University of Arizona is on the land and territories of Indigenous peoples . Today, Arizona is home to 22 federally recognized tribes, with Tucson being home to the O’odham and the Yaqui. The university strives to build sustainable relationships with sovereign Native Nations and Indigenous communities through education offerings, partnerships, and community service. University Information Security and Privacy © 2026 The Arizona Board of Regents on behalf of The University of Arizona . keyboard_arrow_up Back to top 