 University of California partners with U.S. Department of Energy to advance energy, discovery and national security through Genesis Mission | University of California Skip to main content University of California Return to home page menu mobile menu open Main Navigation About Toggle subnavigation for About About UC Campuses & locations Information center Leadership News Impact Advocate Toggle subnavigation for Advocate UC Advocacy Network Stand Up for UC Speak Up for Science America 250 Top Menu Admissions Alumni Jobs Search Home News University of California partners with U.S. Department of Energy to advance energy, discovery and national security through Genesis Mission University of California partners with U.S. Department of Energy to advance energy, discovery and national security through Genesis Mission July 24, 2026 UC Newsroom Inside the National Ignition Facility at Lawrence Livermore National Lab. Scientists at seven UC campuses and three national labs lead 15 percent of DOE-funded projects. Credit: Elena Zhukova The University of California is a crucial partner in the U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission , a historic effort to develop AI-enabled scientific workflows designed to accelerate breakthroughs in energy, discovery science and national security. DOE announced its first round of awards July 22. Of 278 projects nationwide, 40, or 15 percent, are led by UC investigators, including faculty at seven UC campuses and scientists at the UC-affiliated Lawrence Berkeley, Lawrence Livermore and Los Alamos National Laboratories — with UC campuses and labs partnering on many more projects. These awards will address some of the nation’s most pressing energy, scientific and engineering challenges, including nuclear energy, critical mineral extraction, chip design and commercial fusion energy. Funded projects will gain access to DOE’s AI agent frameworks, advanced AI models and software made available through industry partners, as well as high-performance computing resources already available across DOE’s National Laboratories and partner facilities. These capabilities will enable researchers to rapidly design, test and refine new approaches to accelerate scientific discovery. “The University of California is proud to partner with the U.S. Department of Energy to advance the Genesis Mission for the benefit of every American,” said UC Vice President for Research and Innovation Theresa Maldonado. “UC’s world-class scientists and facilities offer unmatched potential to achieve DOE’s goals for energy, discovery and national security.” “UC’s three affiliated national laboratories are recognized as premier partners to the Department of Energy in executing the important goals of the Genesis Mission,” said UC National Laboratories Vice President June Yu. “Projects funded by the Genesis Mission continue a tradition of exceptionally talented scientists at UC national labs achieving breakthroughs in fields that are vital to the nation’s strength and competitiveness, including AI, supercomputing, quantum systems and nuclear energy.” The Genesis Mission aligns with UC’s systemwide strategic focus and leadership in nuclear energy, advanced computing, quantum science and artificial intelligence. Through its Artificial Intelligence Science at Scale initiative , the UC Office of the President (UCOP) is funding three multicampus teams of UC researchers to develop new AI approaches in genomics, quantum materials discovery and geothermal energy, with an additional team focused on integrated data platforms. In June 2026, UCOP, in partnership with Los Alamos and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories, held it first AI Science at Scale Summit in Santa Fe, New Mexico. The UC Initiative for Fusion Energy , also funded by UCOP, supports two teams of UC scientists to accelerate progress toward a future powered by abundant, stable, zero-carbon fusion energy. View all the projects funded through the Genesis Mission. Keep reading Thursday, November 13, 2025 UC Berkeley and Project CETI study shows sperm whales… Scientists have spent the last five years observing sperm whale communication and behaviors using tags, buoys and drones. They’ve finally begun to learn how whales use calls for communication. Thursday, October 16, 2025 At the crossroads of language and AI As technology advances in English, a UC Santa Cruz professor is making sure Indigenous languages don’t get left behind. The University of California opened its doors in 1869 with just 10 faculty members and 40 students. Today, the UC system has more than 300,000 students and 265,000 faculty and staff, with 2.5 million alumni living around the world. Subscribe to our newsletter Email address Subscribe UC quick links About UC Campuses & locations Press releases Contact us Advocate External resources Apply or transfer Office of the President Academic Senate Board of Regents UCnet: Employee resources Footer Links 2 Accessibility Terms of Use Privacy Statement Copyright © The Regents of the University of California Social Facebook Twitter Instagram TikTok YouTube LinkedIn 