 The Genesis Mission | Research & Innovation Office | University of Colorado Boulder Skip to main content Research & Innovation Office Home About Operations & Administration Research Operations & Administration Office of Contracts and Grants Partners with researchers throughout the lifecycle of an award to obtain and manage external support for sponsored activities. Program Management Office The strategic bridge between sponsored projects and their impact on the campus research portfolio objectives. Research Professor Series Clinical Professor Series Policies Reports Contact Us (RIO Directory) Security & Integrity Research Security & Integrity Animal and Human Subject Research Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) Office of Animal Resources Human Research & IRB Research Security and Export Controls Research Security Office of Export Controls International Travel Research Integrity Conflicts of Interest and Commitment Research Misconduct Responsible Conduct of Research Training Other Resources Controlled Drug Use and Cannabis Research Quality Assurance / Quality Improvement (QA/QI) Strategy & Development Research Strategy & Development Strategic Initiatives AB Nexus Center for National Security Initiatives CUbit Quantum Initiative Sustainability Research Initiative Research Development Find Funding Limited Submission Funding Opportunities Proposal Writing Support Broader Impacts Network Faculty Development Webinars & Workshops Principal Investigator (PI) Academy RIO Faculty Fellows Distinguished Research Lectureship Office of Postdoctoral Affairs Supports training, career development and community-building among postdocs. Core Facilities and Shared Instrumentation Equipment, instrumentation and services to help you achieve your research goals. Innovation & Partnerships Innovation & Partnerships Venture Partners at CU Boulder Translates groundbreaking discoveries into new solutions, businesses and partnerships. Innovation & Entrepreneurship Initiative Connects entrepreneurs with the resources they need to turn their ideas into impactful ventures. Industry Research Partnerships Lowers barriers to innovation by connecting partners with top talent and supporting scalable collaboration. Institutes & Centers Research Institutes & Centers Research Institutes CU Boulder’s 12 research institutes account for more than half of all sponsored research dollars at the university. Research Centers CU Boulder’s 75+ centers conduct research, scholarship and creative work, education and/or leadership and service activities. Inclusion Translate English Spanish Chinese French German Korean Lao Nepali Japanese Tibetan Search Enter the terms you wish to search for. Other ways to search: Events Calendar Campus Map Research & Innovation Office Home About Operations & Administration Research Operations & Administration Office of Contracts and Grants Partners with researchers throughout the lifecycle of an award to obtain and manage external support for sponsored activities. Program Management Office The strategic bridge between sponsored projects and their impact on the campus research portfolio objectives. Research Professor Series Clinical Professor Series Policies Reports Contact Us (RIO Directory) Security & Integrity Research Security & Integrity Animal and Human Subject Research Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) Office of Animal Resources Human Research & IRB Research Security and Export Controls Research Security Office of Export Controls International Travel Research Integrity Conflicts of Interest and Commitment Research Misconduct Responsible Conduct of Research Training Other Resources Controlled Drug Use and Cannabis Research Quality Assurance / Quality Improvement (QA/QI) Strategy & Development Research Strategy & Development Strategic Initiatives AB Nexus Center for National Security Initiatives CUbit Quantum Initiative Sustainability Research Initiative Research Development Find Funding Limited Submission Funding Opportunities Proposal Writing Support Broader Impacts Network Faculty Development Webinars & Workshops Principal Investigator (PI) Academy RIO Faculty Fellows Distinguished Research Lectureship Office of Postdoctoral Affairs Supports training, career development and community-building among postdocs. Core Facilities and Shared Instrumentation Equipment, instrumentation and services to help you achieve your research goals. Innovation & Partnerships Innovation & Partnerships Venture Partners at CU Boulder Translates groundbreaking discoveries into new solutions, businesses and partnerships. Innovation & Entrepreneurship Initiative Connects entrepreneurs with the resources they need to turn their ideas into impactful ventures. Industry Research Partnerships Lowers barriers to innovation by connecting partners with top talent and supporting scalable collaboration. Institutes & Centers Research Institutes & Centers Research Institutes CU Boulder’s 12 research institutes account for more than half of all sponsored research dollars at the university. Research Centers CU Boulder’s 75+ centers conduct research, scholarship and creative work, education and/or leadership and service activities. Inclusion News & Events Contact Us RIO Bulletin Donor Opportunities Breadcrumb Home Research Strategy & Development Funding Limited Submission Funding Opportunities The Genesis Mission The Genesis Mission The Genesis Mission Teaming and Concepts Note : This page will be updated as new Genesis Mission challenges, funding opportunities, and partnership opportunities emerge. The Genesis Mission is evolving into a more than $5 billion, whole-of-government initiative to accelerate scientific discovery through using artificial intelligence. Federal agencies have identified 33 National Science & Technology Challenges spanning health, advanced manufacturing, energy and infrastructure, fundamental science, and national security. Additional challenges and funding opportunities are expected as the initiative continues to develop. As the Genesis Mission continues to develop, future opportunities may move quickly and require interdisciplinary and cross-sector teams. Early visibility into research interests will allow the Research & Innovation Office (RIO) to identify complementary expertise, develop partnerships, and position teams before formal solicitations are released. Identifying partnerships to strengthen CU Boulder proposals RIO is identifying CU Boulder research concepts, expertise, and potential academic, industry, government, and National Laboratory partners aligned with these challenges and emerging Genesis priorities. Early engagement will help RIO assess opportunities, facilitate team development, and prepare CU Boulder researchers to respond effectively as new Genesis funding and partnership opportunities emerge. Please complete the Genesis Mission Positioning & Partnership Support form to share your project concept, existing team, and partnership needs and help RIO identify potential next steps and connections. Researchers who submitted concepts for the April 2026 DOE Genesis Mission funding opportunity are encouraged to submit updated information as soon as possible ahead of the anticipated second round and the potentially short timeline for developing competitive teams and proposals. Positioning & Partnership If you are CU Boulder faculty member interested in partnering on a Genesis Mission project, please complete our teaming form to help RIO identify potential next steps and connections. View Genesis Mission Teaming Form Supplemental information The following agency announcements were released on July 22, 2026: NSF Genesis Dear Colleague Letter (DCL) Department of the Interior (DOI) Department of Transportation (DOT) National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Science & Technology View April 2026 DOE Genesis Mission FOA External Partnership Interest Form This form is for external partners interested in collaborating with CU Boulder on a Genesis Mission project. If you are a CU Boulder faculty member, please complete our internal teaming form instead . You must have JavaScript enabled to use this form. Indicates required field First name Last name Email address Genesis Mission Challenge of Interest Which Genesis Mission challenge(s) are you interested in exploring with CU Boulder? What does your organization bring? In 2–3 sentences, please describe the expertise, capabilities, technologies, data, facilities, resources, or other assets your organization could contribute to a potential Genesis Mission collaboration. How would you like to partner with CU Boulder? In 2–3 sentences, please describe the type of collaboration or partnership you would like to explore with CU Boulder and any specific research areas, expertise or CU Boulder groups you are interested in connecting with. CU Boulder connection(s) Is there a specific CU Boulder researcher, department, center or program you are interested in connecting with? Search Faculty Experts Research and expertise across CU Boulder. Research Institutes Our 12 research institutes conduct more than half of the sponsored research at CU Boulder. Research Centers More than 75 research centers span the campus, covering a broad range of topics. Research Computing A carefully integrated cyberinfrastructure supports CU Boulder research. Donor Opportunities Research & Innovation Office rio@colorado.edu View RIO Organizational Chart University of Colorado Boulder © Regents of the University of Colorado Privacy • Legal & Trademarks • Campus Map University of Colorado Boulder © Regents of the University of Colorado 