 Department of Energy Genesis Mission grant to UF-led team will speed up development of stronger materials - News from Herbert Wertheim College of Engineering Skip to main content School Logo Link News from Herbert Wertheim College of Engineering MENU Herbert Wertheim College of Engineering More Subscribe to Our Newsletter Submit a Story Idea MENU Research & Innovation Honors & Awards Students Alumni Magazines & Newsletters MSE Research Grants Department of Energy Genesis Mission grant to UF-led team will speed up development of stronger materials July 23, 2026 By Dave Schlenker Story originally published on UF News UF engineering professors Yijia Gu, left, Ravit Silverstein and Doug Spearot were awarded a Genesis Mission grant recently. UF-led team wins a DOE Genesis Mission grant for an AI‑driven platform that accelerates materials discovery. The platform merges electron microscopy, AI and modeling to significantly speed data analysis. Results will produce stronger, more heat‑resistant materials for aerospace, energy and nuclear use. A cross-disciplinary research team led by the University of Florida won a prestigious federal grant on Wednesday to develop an autonomous artificial intelligence platform that could fundamentally change how new materials are discovered. Selected from more than 5,000 applications, the project is one of 278 chosen under the U.S. Department of Energy’s highly competitive Genesis Mission Request for Applications program. It brings together universities, national laboratories and industry to accelerate scientific discovery through next-generation artificial intelligence. Read full story Leading the Way Forward Meet ‘Mr. Microgravity’: ChE doctoral student Thomas Corbin loves connecting with Gators — and space School Logo Link News from Herbert Wertheim College of Engineering Facebook X (formerly Twitter) YouTube LinkedIn Instagram Flickr News Feed Contact us Herbert Wertheim College of Engineering 300 Weil Hall P.O. Box 116550 Gainesville, FL 32611-6550 Office phone numbers info@eng.ufl.edu Contact webmaster Subscribe to Our Newsletter Get regular Gator Engineering updates Sign up Make a Gift Online giving for the Herbert Wertheim College of Engineering. Give Now UF Privacy Statement Accessibility Regulations Search Submit 