 UH Mānoa researchers selected for national effort to advance AI-driven science | University of Hawaiʻi System News Skip to content Kauaʻi Community College will be closed through Friday, September 11, due to Hurricane Lowell. Students and employees should look for campus-specific messages with additional information on operations, employee reporting and any other exceptions. Please monitor your @hawaii.edu email and UH RAVE Alerts for updates. Stay safe. UH Home Twitter Facebook Instagram YouTube LinkedIn Flickr RSS Academic Research People Community Administrative Athletics Videos By Campus dropdown menu column 1 Hawaiʻi Hilo Honolulu Kapiʻolani Kauaʻi column 2 Leeward Mānoa Maui West Oʻahu Windward Submit Open mobile menu Close mobile menu UH Mānoa researchers selected for national effort to advance AI-driven science UH News » Research » UH Mānoa researchers selected… July 27, 2026 UH News Reading time: 3 minutes Assistant Professor Liuwan Zhu (left) and Assistant Professor Zepeng Li (right) will lead two UH research projects selected for the U.S. Department of Energy’s inaugural Genesis Mission, a national initiative using artificial intelligence to accelerate scientific discovery Two University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa research projects have been selected for the inaugural U.S. Department of Energy ( DOE ) Genesis Mission portfolio , placing UH ’s flagship research campus among a select group of universities and research institutions nationwide using artificial intelligence ( AI ) to accelerate scientific breakthroughs. In the announcement on July 22 , the DOE said the projects were selected to develop and demonstrate AI -enabled tools and workflows designed to accelerate breakthroughs in energy, science and national security. Each project is eligible for Phase I awards of $500,000–$750,000 over nine months, providing investigators with the opportunity to develop innovative AI -driven research while positioning them to compete for future Phase II awards of up to $15 million. “The selection of not one, but two UH Mānoa projects for this highly competitive DOE mission reflects the strength of the UH research community and the creativity of our faculty in pursuing solutions to some of the most complex challenges facing society,” said UH Interim Vice President for Research and Innovation Chad B. Walton. “At UH , we are committed to fostering an environment where bold ideas, interdisciplinary collaboration and emerging technologies can come together to create meaningful impact not only in Hawaiʻi , but across the nation, and around the world.” The two UH Mānoa projects selected are led by researchers in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Department of Physics and Astronomy . AI security for critical infrastructure One project, led by Assistant Professor Liuwan Zhu from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, focuses on improving the security and reliability of AI systems used in critical infrastructure. The project, called STRATOS (Security and Trust Runtime Architecture for Time-critical Operational Science), will develop an AI security platform designed to detect and respond to cyber threats targeting AI systems used in real-time operations, such as electrical grid management and forecasting. The research team will test the technology using a dual-site platform that includes the UH Mānoa campus microgrid and real-time computing systems at Argonne National Laboratory. The project includes collaborators from Old Dominion University and Argonne National Laboratory. AI advances the search for extremely rare decay processes The second project, led by Professor Zepeng Li from the Department of Physics and Astronomy, will develop an AI foundation model to support searches for neutrinoless double beta decay, one of the most important unanswered questions in nuclear and particle physics. Neutrinoless double beta decay is an extremely rare nuclear process that, if observed, could help scientists better understand the nature of neutrinos, the mysterious “ghost particles” that are abundant in the universe and are constantly passing through us without interacting. In particular, this rare decay process could tell us whether the neutrino is its own anti-particle. Researchers around the world are searching for this phenomenon using different types of detectors, but each experiment typically relies on its own specialized software and analysis methods. Li’s project aims to create a shared AI framework that can learn from data across multiple detector technologies, helping researchers identify patterns, analyze results and improve collaboration among experiments studying this rare event. The project will develop a unified AI framework that streamlines data analysis across the diverse detector technologies used in neutrinoless double-beta decay experiments, accelerating the search for this rare process. The Genesis Mission brings together DOE laboratories and universities to combine advanced AI , high-performance computing and scientific expertise. UH Mānoa was among 168 universities selected for the first round of Genesis Mission projects, which included a total of 278 research efforts involving more than 340 institutions across the country. Through these projects, UH researchers will contribute to emerging applications of AI in fundamental physics, energy systems and national security, while strengthening Hawaiʻi ’s role in cutting-edge scientific research. Related Posts: Legislative update: Senate budget omits UH priorities 2025 legislative session recap and UH budget outcomes 2025 legislative session update, budget bill advances AI College of Engineering College of Natural Sciences electrical and computer engineering engineering faculty recognition innovation Manoa Excellence in Research Manoa research natural science physics and astronomy STEM UH Manoa Share This Mānoa Links Admissions Academics Research Athletics Alumni Events Calendar --> U H Manoa's Twitter U H Manoa's Facebook U H Manoa's Instagram U H Manoa's Linkedin U H Manoa's Flickr U H Manoa's YouTube Most Popular UH launches free ‘ AI for Hawaiʻi’ course for everyone Fungi found on coconut husks can decompose plastic, sunscreen Hurricane Lala douses Hawaiʻi with 1.9M Olympic-size pools of water Featured Video Alumni Haliʻa Aloha: Taylor Averill --> Featured Video New and Improved Student Information Dashboard --> Inaugural Waiʻanae EMT Program previous post: 3 years later: Maui wildfire recovery shows progress, challenges remain next post: Hawaiʻi corals may have time to adapt to future heat stress Watch the latest news of the University of Hawaiʻi View News Videos 2444 Dole Street Honolulu, HI 96822 Have a story idea or a question? Contact news@hawaii.edu An equal opportunity institution Use of this site implies consent with our Usage Policy copyright © 2026 University of Hawaiʻi --> X Facebook Instagram YouTube LinkedIn Flickr RSS Contact UH If required, information contained on this website can be made available in an alternative format upon request. Get Adobe Acrobat Reader About Calendar COVID-19 Updates Directory Emergency Information For Media MyUH Work at UH English Gagana Samoa Kapasen Chuuk Lea faka-Tonga - Tongan Tiếng Việt ภาษาไทย Ilokano Tagalog Cebuano Kajin Majôl 简体中文 繁體中文 日本語 한국어 Español ʻŌlelo Hawaiʻi By Category dropdown menu Academic Research People Community Athletics Administrative Videos By Campus dropdown menu Hawaiʻi Hilo Honolulu Kapiʻolani Kauaʻi Leeward Mānoa Maui West Oʻahu Windward Back To Top Search 