 Mizzou-led team selected for U.S. Department of Energy’s inaugural Genesis Mission Skip to navigation Skip to content University of Missouri Homepage University of Missouri Homepage MU Wordmark Faculty Directory Staff Directory Calendar & Events Featured News Give Search search Mizzou Engineering menu Academics expand_more Academics Undergraduate Degrees Graduate Degrees Minors and Certificates Online Programs ABET Accreditation Prospective Students expand_more Admissions On-Campus Visit Undergraduate Scholarships Graduate Admissions Graduate Aid Departments expand_more Departments Chemical and Biomedical Engineering Civil & Environmental Engineering David L. Payne Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Industrial and Systems Engineering John J. Boswell Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering Naval Science Research expand_more Research Featured Research Projects Research Centers RED Grant Undergraduate Research Facilities Faculty Research Resources Mizzou Engineering Research Day Current Students expand_more Student Services Advising Tutoring Student Resources Career Services Student Organizations Technical Communications Toolbox Engineering Library Engineers’ Week MizzouOne Connect with Us expand_more About Strategic Plan News Meet the Dean Dean's Office Faculty Careers Industry Partnerships Alumni Camps and Events Apply Now High Impact Research, Scholarship and Creative Works | MAE | MAE Research Mizzou-led team selected for U.S. Department of Energy’s inaugural Genesis Mission July 22, 2026 Photo by Michael Boles A University of Missouri-led research team has been selected to participate in the U.S. Department of Energy’s inaugural Genesis Mission , a nationwide initiative using artificial intelligence to accelerate scientific discovery. The project is entitled “Toward a U.S. Institute for Cell Design: AI-Driven Computer-Ready Synthetic Cells with Quantum Integration.” Led by Roseanna Zia , the Dave Wollersheim Professor of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at Mizzou, the multi-institution team will develop and test an AI-enabled workflow for designing synthetic cells for advanced biomanufacturing and biosecurity, enabling capabilities such as on-demand molecular-scale fabrication of valuable chemicals and materials. The team will combine whole-cell modeling, high-performance computing, synthetic-cell construction and advanced experimental measurements in a closed-loop design–build–measure–model process. The process will be accelerated using artificial intelligence tools to move synthetic-cell engineering beyond slow trial-and-error experimentation toward a predictive engineering discipline. Zia will lead the project which includes six partner institutions: the University of Minnesota, Stanford University, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, the J. Craig Venter Institute, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Princeton University. AI will be integrated throughout the workflow. Graph neural networks and related machine-learning approaches will be used to accelerate multiscale whole-cell modeling, support genome and cell design, and improve analysis of cryo-electron tomography, visual proteomics and live-cell imaging data. The team will also evaluate where AI provides a measurable advantage in prediction accuracy, computational tractability and experimental interpretation. “Our long-term goal is to establish a comprehensive workflow for producing programmable synthetic cells that can serve as the living factories of the future,” Zia said. “No single laboratory can build that capability alone. Our team is bringing together cell construction, whole-cell modeling, artificial intelligence, high-performance computing and advanced measurement so that predictions can be tested experimentally and experimental results can continuously improve the models.” The Genesis Mission combines AI, high-performance computing and scientific expertise to accelerate scientific discovery across the Department of Energy’s mission areas. Mizzou’s project is among 168 university-led projects selected following the largest response to a funding opportunity in the department’s history. “The Genesis Mission represents a bold new approach to scientific discovery, bringing together artificial intelligence, advanced computing and outstanding researchers from across the country,” Thomas Spencer, Mizzou’s vice chancellor for research, said. “We are excited that Mizzou will be part of this effort and that Dr. Zia’s pioneering work on AI-enabled tools for engineering synthetic cells will help advance discoveries with potential impacts in biotechnology, medicine and beyond.” This story originally appeared on Show Me Mizzou . Want more stories like this? Subscribe to the Show Me Mizzou newsletter . Artificial Intelligence biomaterials Department of Energy Roseanna N. Zia University of Missouri Homepage University of Missouri Homepage MU Wordmark Contact us College of Engineering W1024 Lafferre Hall Columbia , MO 65211 engineering@missouri.edu Phone: (573) 882-4375 Facebook Instagram Linkedin X Youtube Mizzou is an equal opportunity employer . © 2026 — Curators of the University of Missouri . All rights reserved. Restrictions on Use of University Marks, Identifiers and Content . DMCA/Copyright Information . Accessibility . Privacy policy . 