 Mizzou-led team selected for U.S. Department of Energy’s inaugural Genesis Mission Skip to navigation Skip to content University of Missouri Homepage University of Missouri Homepage MU Wordmark About Subscribe Search search Show Me Mizzou menu Topics expand_more Campus Research Students Teaching and Learning Alumni Community Impact Photos and Videos Accolades President Choi's Blog north_east All Topics Archive Schools & Colleges expand_more MU College of Agriculture, Food and Natural Resources MU College of Arts & Science MU College of Education and Human Development MU College of Engineering MU College of Health Sciences MU College of Veterinary Medicine Missouri School of Journalism MU School of Law MU School of Medicine MU Robert J. Trulaske, Sr. College of Business MU Sinclair School of Nursing Events MIZZOU Magazine expand_more Current Issue Past Issues Contact & Advertise About For the Media News Release | Research Mizzou-led team selected for U.S. Department of Energy’s inaugural Genesis Mission July 22, 2026 Contact: Janese Heavin, heavinj@missouri.edu Photo by Michael Boles A University of Missouri-led research team has been selected to participate in the U.S. Department of Energy’s inaugural Genesis Mission, a nationwide initiative using artificial intelligence to accelerate scientific discovery. The project is entitled “Toward a U.S. Institute for Cell Design: AI-Driven Computer-Ready Synthetic Cells with Quantum Integration.” Led by Roseanna Zia, the Dave Wollersheim Professor of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at Mizzou, the multi-institution team will develop and test an AI-enabled workflow for designing synthetic cells for advanced biomanufacturing and biosecurity, enabling capabilities such as on-demand molecular-scale fabrication of valuable chemicals and materials. The team will combine whole-cell modeling, high-performance computing, synthetic-cell construction and advanced experimental measurements in a closed-loop design–build–measure–model process. The process will be accelerated using artificial intelligence tools to move synthetic-cell engineering beyond slow trial-and-error experimentation toward a predictive engineering discipline. Zia will lead the project which includes six partner institutions: the University of Minnesota, Stanford University, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, the J. Craig Venter Institute, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Princeton University. AI will be integrated throughout the workflow. Graph neural networks and related machine-learning approaches will be used to accelerate multiscale whole-cell modeling, support genome and cell design, and improve analysis of cryo-electron tomography, visual proteomics and live-cell imaging data. The team will also evaluate where AI provides a measurable advantage in prediction accuracy, computational tractability and experimental interpretation. “Our long-term goal is to establish a comprehensive workflow for producing programmable synthetic cells that can serve as the living factories of the future,” Zia said. “No single laboratory can build that capability alone. Our team is bringing together cell construction, whole-cell modeling, artificial intelligence, high-performance computing and advanced measurement so that predictions can be tested experimentally and experimental results can continuously improve the models.” The Genesis Mission combines AI, high-performance computing and scientific expertise to accelerate scientific discovery across the Department of Energy's mission areas. Mizzou's project is among 168 university-led projects selected following the largest response to a funding opportunity in the department's history. "The Genesis Mission represents a bold new approach to scientific discovery, bringing together artificial intelligence, advanced computing and outstanding researchers from across the country,” Thomas Spencer, Mizzou’s vice chancellor for research, said. “We are excited that Mizzou will be part of this effort and that Dr. Zia's pioneering work on AI-enabled tools for engineering synthetic cells will help advance discoveries with potential impacts in biotechnology, medicine and beyond." MU College of Engineering Facebook Share Linkedin Post Related Stories Sep. 7, 2026 It takes more than school spirit to be Truman the Tiger Mizzou sport science experts are helping the university’s beloved mascot prepare for the physical demands of performing on game day. Sep. 7, 2026 Cherng Summer Scholars explore interests through individual projects With the support of Mizzou faculty mentors, 14 students participated in research or creative scholarship projects. Sep. 7, 2026 Mizzou researchers unlock a new way to harness copper against disease Researchers identified the first compound to block a fundamental copper transport system, opening the door for new treatments. Sep. 1, 2026 Historic $50 million gift powers Payne Energy Innovation Center at Mizzou David Payne’s support will also transform electrical engineering and computer science while accelerating Mizzou’s leadership in energy innovation. Subscribe to Show Me Mizzou Stay up-to-date with the latest news by subscribing to the Show Me Mizzou newsletter. Subscribe University of Missouri Homepage University of Missouri Homepage MU Wordmark Contact us Marketing and Communications 130 Heinkel Building Columbia , MO 65211 newsandinfo@missouri.edu Meet our team Facebook Instagram Linkedin X Resources Accolades Archive Events Submit a Story or Accolade Find Info For Students Faculty/Staff Families Alumni Media Mizzou is an equal opportunity employer . © 2026 — Curators of the University of Missouri . All rights reserved. Restrictions on Use of University Marks, Identifiers and Content . DMCA/Copyright Information . Accessibility . Privacy policy . 