 UNLV College of Engineering | UNLV Skip to main content University of Nevada, Las Vegas Students Faculty/Staff Alumni Donors Audiences Students Faculty/Staff Alumni Donors Topics About Academics Admissions Athletics Campus Life Research Menu University of Nevada, Las Vegas News Center News Center About Academics Admissions Athletics Campus Life Research Find close News Center menu News Center News Center Home About Search Browse Browse Archive Browse By College/School Browse By Administrative Unit Browse by Topic Publications Accomplishments Class Notes Experts Directory UNLV In The News UNLV Today Announcements UNLV Magazine Submit Submit Class Note Submit a UNLV Today Accomplishment or Announcement Share a Story Idea Contact Us close find region Find Search A-Z Index Directories × Important Notice: Major IT service outages April 7-10 --> Quick Links Bookstore Bookstore Calendar Calendar Campus Maps Campus Maps Degrees Degrees Libraries Libraries MyUNLV MyUNLV News Center News Center RebelCard RebelCard Rebelmail Rebelmail Social Media Social Media UNLV Mail UNLV Mail WebCampus WebCampus Loading Directories Home A-Z Index Colleges, Schools, and Departments Administrative Units Research Centers and Institutes Resources and Services Employee Directory Contact UNLV Social Media Directory UNLV Mobile Apps Breadcrumb UNLV Home News Center Home Accomplishments Home UNLV College of Engineering Notable: UNLV College of Engineering The UNLV Howard R. Hughes College of Engineering has been selected for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission for a project aimed at making nuclear power plant analysis faster and less expensive, potentially accelerating the deployment of nuclear energy. Led by WooHyun Jung, professor of mechanical engineering at UNLV, the $750,000, nine-month project is one of 278 selected nationwide for the initiative and was chosen for the “Delivering Nuclear Energy that is Faster, Safer, Cheaper” challenge. The Genesis Mission is a historic national initiative designed to double America’s scientific productivity by accelerating breakthroughs in energy, discovery science, and national security. The projects “represent the very best of our nation’s scientific enterprise,” U.S. Secretary of Energy Chris Wright said in a press release. Learn more about the project and the College of Engineering’s work to advance nuclear energy by visiting the website . Login & Submit an Accomplishment August 14 2026 Campus Units: Howard R. Hughes College of Engineering People in the News From Lake Mead to the Backyard: Water Conservation 101 People | September 1, 2026 From Lake Mead to the Backyard: Water Conservation 101 Longtime UNLV soil, water, and plant scientist Dale Devitt shatters sustainability myths and shares lawn care tips and tricks to maximize water conservation for desert living. The Interview: Minerva Massis People | August 31, 2026 The Interview: Minerva Massis While her fMRI journey has stretched nearly around the world, the chance to return to the university that helped shape her path was a no-brainer. The Interview: Gloribert Roque-Melendez People | August 24, 2026 The Interview: Gloribert Roque-Melendez After years of building a career at a large accounting firm, Gloribert Roque-Melendez planned an early retirement. Guest lecturing at UNLV gave her an unexpected reason to change course. More People Employment UNLV Strong Wellness Community Top Tier 2.0 Campus Notifications University Statements and Compliance Web Privacy Statement Web Accessibility Website Feedback University of Nevada, Las Vegas 4505 S. Maryland Pkwy. Las Vegas, NV 89154 Phone: 702-895-3011 Campus Maps Parking Information © 2026 UNLV Produced by UNLV Web & Digital Strategy Social Media at UNLV 