 A Pitt-led team plans to automate quantum computing research with a Department of Energy grant | University of Pittsburgh Skip to main content Explore Sections open search open menu Close From the latest big breakthrough to the most influential and inspiring figures on campus to Pitt in the community, Pittwire is your official source for what’s happening now. Explore Sections Our City/Our Campus University News Cultivate Student Success Propel Scholarship, Creativity, and Innovation Be Welcoming and Engaged Promote Accountability and Trust It's Possible at Pitt Pitt Magazine Accolades Explore By Category Features & Articles Accolades & Honors Ones to Watch Announcements and Updates Pittwire Other Links Event Calendar Social Media Directory Close Search Pitt Search Search for People Close Global Menu Apply Visit Give Pittwire Events Navigation Navigation About Academics Admissions Research Life at Pitt Athletics Colleges & Schools Colleges & Schools Arts & Sciences Business Computing & Information Dental Medicine Education Engineering General Studies Health & Rehabilitation Honors College Law Medicine Nursing Pharmacy Public & Intl Affairs Public Health Social Work Info For Info For COVID-19 Response Alumni Community Global Sustainability Twitter Instagram Facebook Youtube Close Search Pittwire Search Search www.pitt.edu Features & Articles A Pitt-led team plans to automate quantum computing research with a Department of Energy grant July 24, 2026 Tags Propel scholarship, creativity and innovation It's Possible at Pitt Kenneth P. Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences School of Computing and Information Subscribe to Pittwire Today Get the most interesting and important stories from the University of Pittsburgh. Subscribe A new University of Pittsburgh-led research project aims to automate the scientific process, using a team of AI agents to harness a promising new type of quantum computing that could enable discoveries in chemistry and materials science. Led by School of Computing and Information Professor Youtao Zhang , the project is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Genesis Mission , a national effort to enable scientific discovery using AI. “This ambitious, innovative project builds on the best of Pitt’s strengths in research computing and quantum science,” said Senior Vice Chancellor for Research Rob Rutenbar. “Leveraging the transformative potential of AI and new forms of collaboration between universities and national laboratories, projects like this one are bolstering U.S. leadership in scientific research.” While circuit-based quantum computing involves isolating pairs of units called qubits to make calculations, measurement-based quantum computing — the focus of Zhang’s project — would instead make use of dense, interconnected networks of qubits. This approach has several advantages, but the field is still young: The process of measuring these qubits would take an imposing amount of computational power, and not enough of the necessary algorithms and principles have been developed to make use of any data collected. Each of these problems would be daunting for a human team to tackle, which is why Zhang and his colleagues are turning to AI instead. “We’re building AI that can automatically design, optimize and verify measurement-based quantum computing, automatically discovering better ways to build quantum computations,” said Zhang. “By automating the workflow, the project aims to accelerate discoveries in chemistry, materials science and energy.” The project’s team includes Assistant Professor Junyu Liu and Associate Professor Xulong Tang , both in Pitt’s School of Computing and Information, as well as collaborators at Virginia Tech and Argonne National Laboratory. The researchers are designing specialized AI agents to perform different research tasks: one to determine which measurements to make, one to develop new principles that can be tested, one to optimize the process for hardware and one to manage the other three. AI agents, Zhang and his colleagues are betting, are well-positioned to boil down the complexities of quantum research in a way that would be impossible for humans. The system of agents will be built to improve with time and experience, with the goal of creating and sharing a pipeline for measurement-based quantum computing that can contribute to future breakthroughs. A Pitt researcher is also contributing to a Genesis project led by the University of Hawaii. Pranava Teja Surukuchi , assistant professor in the Kenneth P. Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences’ Department of Physics and Astronomy, will lend his expertise to the project on leveraging AI to unify search technologies for neutrinoless double-beta decay, a theoretical process that has the potential to answer key questions about the makeup of our universe. Both projects are part of the Genesis Mission, a historic national initiative led by the Department of Energy, which is building the world’s most powerful integrated science discovery platform across a range of leading application areas. By uniting government, industry, academia and philanthropy, it is accelerating breakthroughs in energy, scientific discovery and national security through a new platform that combines AI, supercomputing, quantum systems and advanced scientific instruments. In FY25, our innovators were responsible for ... 444 invention disclosures 15 new startups 109 new patents, for a top 20 U.S. ranking This year, who knows what’s possible? Learn more at possible.pitt.edu . By Patrick Monahan Trending Pitt is closed Sept. 7 in observance of Labor Day Stay informed and connected with the new PittSAFE app Introducing Pitt’s latest Fulbright student finalists Global Menu Apply Visit Give Pittwire Events About Academics Admissions Research Life at Pitt Athletics Quick Links & Resources Quick Links & Resources Accessibility Statement Affordability Careers Contact Us Departments A-Z Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Find People Information Technology LGBTQ+ Nondiscrimination and Anti-Harassment Policy Privacy Policy Promoting Accountability and Trust My Pitt Regional Campuses Regional Campuses Bradford Greensburg Johnstown Titusville Colleges & Schools Colleges & Schools Arts & Sciences Business Computing & Information Dental Medicine Education Engineering General Studies Health & Rehabilitation Honors College Law Medicine Nursing Pharmacy Public & Intl Affairs Public Health Social Work 4200 Fifth Ave. Pittsburgh , PA 15260 United States +1 412-624-4141 Twitter Instagram Facebook Youtube 