 Unlocking the Physics of Turbulence with AI - USC Viterbi | School of Engineering Menu Search School of Engineering Unlocking the Physics of Turbulence with AI Matilda Bathurst | August 24, 2026 A USC-led collaboration has received Department of Energy Genesis Mission funding to develop an AI framework for unprecedented high-fidelity turbulence simulation. Illustration of a plane being caught in turbulence You’re 30,000 feet in the air, and the seatbelt sign comes on. The pilot warns of turbulence ahead, and you regret having just poured that glass of cream soda. What follows – a few minutes of bumps, and jolts and sticky spillages – is an encounter with turbulence at a scale we can physically feel. But imperceptibly small fluid motions are just as consequential, acting to dissipate energy within the flow at large. Engineers simulate turbulent flows to predict how technologies will perform, reducing aerodynamic drag, improving combustion, and controlling the movement of fluids through industrial systems. But calculating every motion, down to the smallest scales, typically outstrips even the capabilities of today’s supercomputers. Iván Bermejo-Moreno , associate professor at the USC Viterbi ’s Department of Aerospace & Mechanical Engineering , develops methods to improve the prediction of these smaller-scale dynamics. His research group identifies structures within turbulent flows, characterizes their geometry, and analyzes how they interact. The US Department of Energy (DOE) has selected Bermejo-Moreno to lead a multi-institutional project funded through its Genesis Mission , a national initiative that pairs DOE’s 17 national laboratories with universities and industry to pursue AI-driven scientific discovery. The project is a collaboration between Bermejo-Moreno’s group at USC; Ricardo Vinuesa ‘s group in the Aerospace Department at the University of Michigan; and computational scientists Ramesh Balakrishnan and Riccardo Balin , in the Computational Science and Leadership Computing Facility divisions at Argonne National Laboratory. “The bridge here is between artificial intelligence and machine learning methods applied to this analysis of turbulent flow physics,” Bermejo-Moreno said. “We have methodologies that we’ve been developing over several years, and now we want to inject AI and ML techniques to accelerate and enhance those approaches.” Beyond snapshot simulations One of the leading tools for high-fidelity turbulence prediction is large eddy simulation (LES), which calculates the larger motions in a flow while using models to approximate the effect of smaller motions . That model’s accuracy is often the limiting factor for the whole simulation, as most such models work from a snapshot of the flow’s current state to estimate how smaller scales behave. Bermejo-Moreno’s research team proposes an alternative approach. Applying the methods practiced in his lab, they plan to identify coherent structures within the flow, map the geometry, and track how each formation interacts as the flow evolves. The result is a model that learns from a history of interactions, not just a snapshot. The team estimates that this added context will generate a model that holds up across different flows and different simulation codes. “This approach can make the analysis pipelines much more effective, as well as generalizing them to other flows that go beyond what we have simulated previously,” said Bermejo-Moreno. The project will run on some of the world’s most powerful supercomputers, combining Argonne’s high-performance computing and AI expertise, Michigan’s work on AI for fluid flows, and USC’s experience in turbulence-structure analysis. “I see this group of researchers as a synergistic team,” Bermejo-Moreno said. “The elements that all of us bring together make us a strong contender to challenge the current state of the art.” Optimizing design Aircraft, turbomachinery and wind turbines are usually designed using physical experiments and lower grade computational methods; the most detailed simulations are too expensive to run repeatedly while comparing designs. The same limitation applies to emerging technologies; Bermejo-Moreno cites “inertial confinement fusion” in particular, one of the methods proposed by the DOE as an alternative means of generating energy. Faster, more reliable models could surpass that limitation, enabling engineers to use high-fidelity simulation while comparing designs, and running enough simulations to test the design as conditions change — the process known as uncertainty quantification. Physical experiments would remain essential, Bermejo-Moreno said. “Experiments tend to be the strongest means of assessing turbulent flows. But they are also expensive, and the diagnostics of experiments are often time-consuming.” This means that numerical simulations need to be as accurate as they are efficient. “By trying to develop these fine-scale models that are more robust, more capable and faster, we can tackle problems that we couldn’t before,” said Bermejo-Moreno. “That’s going to be highly impactful for design optimization and uncertainty quantification in turbomachinery, aerospace and energy systems.” Published on August 24th, 2026 Last updated on August 24th, 2026 This article may feature some AI-assisted content for clarity, consistency, and to help explore complex scientific concepts with greater depth and creative range. Related Stories August 18, 2026 Can AI "Understand" a Fundamental Concept of Chemistry? When USC Viterbi researchers developed a way to look inside a powerful AI model, they found evidence that it had... April 14, 2026 The Fire Forecast: AI Model Accurately Predicts the Spread of Wildfires in Real Time By combining high-resolution satellite data, terrain data and realistic fire simulations, USC Viterbi researchers have developed a reconstruction and prediction... October 15, 2025 Researchers Invent New AI Tool to Automate Detection of Cancer in Blood Samples Innovation detects cancer cells in blood samples (liquid biopsies) in as little as 10 minutes and identifies hard-to-find cells without... July 14, 2025 Discovering New Materials: AI Can Simulate Billions of Atoms Simultaneously Allegro-FM achieves breakthrough scalability for materials research, enabling simulations 1,000 times larger than previous models. March 30, 2022 Achieving Success Through Imprecision USC Viterbi researchers aim to build a better brain with a never-before-used approach March 11, 2019 A Robotic Leg, Born Without Prior Knowledge, Learns to Walk New AI algorithms could allow robots to learn to move by themselves, imitating animals. Contact Us Visit Us Other USC Links History Awards Foreign Academy Members and Fellows Information For Students Corporate Giving Faculty Recent USC Viterbi News Sep. 04, 2026 NSF Awards $20M to USC and Collaborators to Renew AI Institute Sep. 03, 2026 What Can You Do With 50,000 GPUs? Sep. 02, 2026 The Hidden Cost of Where You Live Read More News © USC Viterbi Privacy Notice | Notice of Non-Discrimination | Digital Accessibility | Smoke-Free Policy Search About School Overview About the School About Andrew Viterbi Awards Facts and Numbers Faculty Directory Ginsburg Hall History Leadership USC Michelson Center From the Dean Dean’s Message Dean’s Report Initiatives and Priorities Engineering + Vision News | Media | Events Events Keynote Lecture Series Media Contact & Press Releases Media Coverage News Newsletter Podcasts Public Image Archive Publications Social Media Video Academics Departments and Academic Programs Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering Astronautical Engineering Alfred E. Mann Department of Biomedical Engineering Mork Family Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science Sonny Astani Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Daniel J. Epstein Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering Engineering in Society Program Technology and Applied Computing Program (TAC) Executive and Continuing Education Aviation Safety and Security Program Corporate and Professional Programs Online Access: Graduate Programs – DEN@Viterbi Specialized Graduate Programs Financial Engineering Program Green Technologies Program Interdisciplinary Data Science Program (IDS) Progressive Degree Program Systems Architecting and Engineering Program Resources and Initiatives Academic Integrity Accreditation Awards Awards Office Globalization Faculty Directory iPodia K-12 Outreach USC Experts Directory Women in Science and Engineering USC USC Stevens School of Advanced Computing and Artificial Intelligence USC Stevens School Website Departments and Programs Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Division of Computing Education (DCE) Technology and Applied Computing Program (TAC) Interdisciplinary Data Science Program (IDS) Affiliated Research Centers and Institutes Information Science Institute (ISI) Institute for Creative Technologies (ICT) Advanced Computing Affinity Groups (ACAGs) Arts, Humanities and Computing Computing and Security Computational Science and Engineering Computational Medicine and Health Computational Social and Behavioral Sciences Quantum Science and Engineering Sustainability and Computation Admission First Year Applicants Master’s Applicants PHD Applicants Transfer Applicants Advancement Alumni Corporate Giving Parents Faculty Faculty Overview Faculty Directory Funding Opportunities Mentoring Positions Available Research Resources Research Research Overview Departments, Research Institutes and Centers Faculty Research Areas Research Infrastructure Research Initiatives Research Vision Student Research Summer Undergraduate Research Experience Students Innovation NSF I-Corps Hub: West Region William W. Wang Technology Innovation and Entrepreneurship Hub USC Stevens Center for Innovation Contact us Visit us 