 Phoenix Tailings | The Future of Rare Earth Refining in America About Innovation Press Careers Contact Securing AmericaN Rare Earth FREEDOM Phoenix Tailings is restoring U.S. industrial independence by building the domestic refining capacity needed to make metals for every major technology. Our mission is to redefine the metals industry by creating the first fully clean mining and metals production company. Phoenix Tailings is built to power the future. How we lead Rare earth metals power virtually every aspect of modern society. From medical devices and automotive systems to advanced defense technologies — they underpin everything. Unlike traditional metals, the challenge is not finding rare earths; it’s the processing, also called refining. Whoever controls the refining of these critical metals controls the future of our economy. Unfortunately, adversarial nations have long dominated this critical step in the supply chain. Phoenix Tailings has brought rare earth refining back to American soil. By leveraging cutting-edge technology, Phoenix has overcome the historical challenges of traditional processing to enable clean and safe domestic production that fuels the modern economy and protects our nation. 01 TECHNOLOGY First Technology is at our core. We have the best minds fundamentally rethinking how processing operates. Through innovation, we can rapidly solve the challenges facing the traditional ecosystem and disrupt the status quo, ensuring the world has access to these critical metals. 02 Vertically-Integrated, Ecosystem Enabling Phoenix Tailings is rebuilding the entire rare earth supply chain from tailings to the final metal and alloy. This will impact every step of the value chain. We partner with other leaders in the space to grow and innovate, whether by buying from, partnering with, or selling into, we know collaboration fuels success. 03 Always InnovatiNG, Constantly Deploying From our founding in a backyard six years ago, we’ve built a world-leading commercial operation through sheer grit and determination. While we are now proven and operating at scale, we still approach every challenge with that same relentless builder’s mindset. 04 Leading America’s Reindustrial­ization Founded and headquartered in the United States, Phoenix Tailings is strengthening national security and leading the onshoring of critical manufacturing to power America’s future. OUR VISION Enable the U.S. and our allies to have access to the incredible technologies that power modern society and the military systems that protect our shores. By creating the world’s first fully clean mining and metals production company, we are doing our part. ABOUT US THE LATEST FROM PHOENIX TAILINGS Phoenix Tailings Appoints Patrick Kumashiro, Former Department of War F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Senior Advisor, as Chief Strategy Officer Phoenix Tailings Appoints Patrick Kumashiro, Former Department of War F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Senior Advisor, as Chief Strategy Officer Phoenix Tailings Expands into Asia Pacific, Appoints George Kellerman as President to Strengthen Allied Rare Earth Supply Chains Phoenix Tailings Expands into Asia Pacific, Appoints George Kellerman as President to Strengthen Allied Rare Earth Supply Chains U.S. Department of War helps launch an ~$1B Initiative with Phoenix Tailings to Rebuild America’s Rare Earth Industrial Base U.S. Department of War helps launch an ~$1B Initiative with Phoenix Tailings to Rebuild America’s Rare Earth Industrial Base Phoenix Tailings Acquires Machinery Partner to Accelerate AI Driven Rare Earth Production and Strengthen America's Critical Minerals Leadership Phoenix Tailings Acquires Machinery Partner to Accelerate AI Driven Rare Earth Production and Strengthen America's Critical Minerals Leadership SECURING AMERICAN INDUSTRY, DEFENSE, AND GROWTH Get in touch © 2026 Phoenix Tailings, Inc. All rights reserved Explore About Innovation Press Careers Company Contact Press Inquiry Privacy Notice Terms of Use Follow Us X LinkedIn Iframe is blocked. Accept cookies to load it. Preferences Accept All Preferences Manage Consent Preferences Essentials Always active Necessary for the site to function. Always On. Provider name Privacy Policy Name Tracker Name Description Tracker description Type Tracker type Retention: Tracker retention No trackers detected for this category. No providers detected for this category. Analytics Analytics Measures usage and improves your experience. Provider name Privacy Policy Name Tracker Name Description Tracker description Type Tracker type Retention: Tracker retention No trackers detected for this category. No providers detected for this category. Marketing Marketing Used for targeted advertising. Provider name Privacy Policy Name Tracker Name Description Tracker description Type Tracker type Retention: Tracker retention No trackers detected for this category. No providers detected for this category. Personalization Personalization Remembers your preferences and provides enhanced features. Provider name Privacy Policy Name Tracker Name Description Tracker description Type Tracker type Retention: Tracker retention No trackers detected for this category. No providers detected for this category. Reject All Accept All Thank you! Your submission has been received! Oops! Something went wrong while submitting the form. By clicking "Accept" , you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. View our Privacy Policy for more information. Preferences Reject Accept 