 University of Utah Selected for Multiple U.S. Department of Energy Genesis Mission Awards – U Research Skip to content Main Menu Home About U Research Meet The Team Advisory Committees Contact Us U Research Administration Units Research Initiatives Historical Timeline Communications & Outreach Grant Support Grant Support FAQs LIFT Pre-Award Office News & Events The Research Post U Research Events Calendar Funding Internal Funding for Researchers Internal Funding Homepage Faculty Small Grant Program (FGSP) Faculty Fellow Awards (FFA) – Reporting Portal Distinguished Research Awards (DRA) Research Instrumentation Form (RIF) University of Utah Research Foundation (UURF) Interdisciplinary Research Initiative 1U4U Collaborative Seed Grant Program Limited Submissions External Funding (PIVOT) Forms No-Cost Extension Request Instructions Research at the U Facts and Figures Utah’s Innovation Your Questions Our Research Research Administration Facilities and Administrative Distribution and Usage Search Site Powered by the University of Utah Powered by Search Campus U Research Funding Internal Funding for Researchers Limited Submissions External Funding (PIVOT) No-Cost Extension Request Instructions Research at the U Facts and Figures Utah’s Innovation Your Questions Our Research Grant Support Grant Support FAQs LIFT Pre-Award Office The Post University of Utah Selected for Multiple U.S. Department of Energy Genesis Mission Awards Research Impact University of Utah Selected for Multiple U.S. Department of Energy Genesis Mission Awards Published: July 23, 2026 Four University of Utah research teams join a national initiative advancing AI, energy, and atmospheric science. The University of Utah, one of the nation’s leading research universities, has been selected to receive multiple U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Genesis Mission awards, joining a national cohort of research institutions advancing transformative science and technology. The Genesis Mission invests in ambitious, high-impact research designed to accelerate scientific discovery, strengthen U.S. competitiveness, and address some of the nation’s most complex scientific and technological challenges. The University of Utah’s awards recognize research teams whose work has the potential to drive breakthroughs in areas of national importance. “The Genesis Mission reflects how scientific discovery is evolving; bringing together artificial intelligence, national laboratories, universities, and interdisciplinary research teams to tackle challenges that no single institution could solve alone,” said Jake Jensen, senior associate vice president for research. University of Utah research teams U researchers are contributing to multiple Genesis Mission projects that reflect the breadth of the university’s expertise in artificial intelligence, energy systems, and atmospheric science. In the Department of Atmospheric Sciences , Gannet Hallar is leading the Bridging Resolution Disparities in the Genesis of Mixed-Phase Clouds (BRIDGE) project, with Court Strong serving as co-principal investigator. Collaborating with researchers from Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and the University of Texas at El Paso, the team will combine advanced atmospheric observations, artificial intelligence, and predictive modeling to improve understanding of how clouds form and produce precipitation. The research aims to improve precipitation forecasting, an important step toward strengthening water security in the western United States and beyond. Professor Steven Krueger in the Department of Atmospheric Sciences is a co-investigator on a Michigan Technological University-led project that brings together researchers from Brigham Young University, Brookhaven National Laboratory, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, and the University of Utah. Together, the team will combine cloud-chamber observations, advanced computer modeling, and artificial intelligence to better understand how clouds produce rain. The research aims to improve precipitation forecasting and strengthen weather and climate models that support water resource management and environmental prediction. Assistant Professor Rohan Basu Roy in the Kahlert School of Computing and the Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute is leading a University of Utah project to help address one of artificial intelligence’s newest challenges: the growing demand for electricity to power AI data centers. His team is developing an AI-driven resource control plane that can intelligently manage computing workloads, allowing data centers to reduce energy use during periods of high demand while minimizing impacts on performance. The project aims to improve grid reliability, lower operating costs, and help prepare the nation’s energy infrastructure for the rapid growth of AI computing. Assistant Professor Morteza Fayazi in the Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering is a co-investigator on a University of Washington-led project, Transforming Science and Energy with AI . The collaboration brings together researchers from multiple institutions to apply artificial intelligence to accelerate scientific discovery and advance next-generation energy systems. “The University of Utah has built a research enterprise that brings together expertise across disciplines to solve problems of national and global importance,” said Erin Rothwell, senior vice president for research. “These Genesis Mission awards recognize the creativity of our researchers and the strength of the partnerships that make ambitious science possible.” About the University of Utah The University of Utah is the state’s flagship institution of higher education, with 18 schools and colleges, more than 100 undergraduate majors and graduate programs and an enrollment of more than 36,000 students. It is a member of the Association of American Universities—an invitation-only, prestigious group of 71 leading research institutions. Ranked No. 1 public university in the West by the Wall Street Journal, the U strives to be a model public university in delivering unmatched value in higher education and health care while making social, economic and cultural contributions that improve the quality of life throughout the state, the nation and the world. About the Genesis Mission The U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission supports transformative research designed to accelerate scientific discovery, foster collaboration, and strengthen America’s research and innovation ecosystem. By investing in visionary research teams, the initiative aims to expand scientific knowledge and develop technologies that address some of the nation’s most significant scientific and technological challenges. Media contact : Amanda Ashley, amanda.ashley@utah.edu , 385-495-4540 RELATED ARTICLES Research & Impact U Research Study Brings Care to New Moms Statewide August 22, 2025 Research studies by the University of Utah are bringing needed support to pregnant people and new moms across the state from cities to the frontier. For the one in five… Read More Research & Impact VPR Statement on the Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Research July 14, 2023 For research activities, policies and guidelines about the use of AI are evolving across many areas. Read More Research & Impact University of Utah Ranks Top 100 Globally for U.S. Utility Patents February 12, 2026 By Amanda Ashley, Director of Communications, Office of the Vice President for Research The University of Utah has been named to the National Academy of Inventors’ (NAI) 2025 Top 100… Read More Go to All Articles Stay connected with The Research Post , a newsletter from the Office of the Vice President for Research. Subscribe for research news, funding opportunities, upcoming events, and stories that highlight the people and projects driving discovery at the University of Utah. Have something to share? We welcome story ideas, announcements, and achievements from across campus. Submit your article to help us spotlight the incredible work happening in our research community. Subscribe Now Submit Article Posted in Research & Impact Tagged Research Impact Previous Post Next Post Resources Researcher Resources Funding Research Administration Units Office of Sponsored Projects Environmental Health and Safety Human Research Protection Program Institutional Animal Care & Use Committee Research Compliance and Integrity News & Updates The Research Post Subscribe for Updates Article Submission Form U Research 201 PRESIDENTS CIRCLE ROOM 210 | SLC, UT 84112 801-581-7236 Information Facts and Figures Meet The Team Webmaster Funding Internal Funding Limited Submissions External Funding © 2026 THE UNIVERSITY OF UTAH Nondiscrimination & Accessibility Disclaimer Privacy About the U Media Contacts 