 Price Engineering Researchers Among First Class of Genesis Mission Awardees – Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute The SCI Institute About the Institute Components of SCI Transdisciplinary R&D Large- Scale Systems Fundamental Algorithms/Applied Math Visualization Computational X Imaging Cyberinfrastructure Professionals Co-Op One-U Responsible AI Initiative Center for High Performance Computing News News from the Institute Newsletter Faculty Honors Best Paper Awards Events Events Calendar Distinguished Seminars SCI Technical Exchange (SCIX) SCI 30th Anniversary Centers, Labs and Research Groups People People Alumni Faculty Alumni Postdoctoral Alumni Graduate Alumni Undergraduate Alumni Employee Alumni Publications Software/Data Opportunities Contact SCI IT Support Powered by the University of Utah Powered by Search Campus Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute Price Engineering Researchers Among First Class of Genesis Mission Awardees In November 2025, the U.S. Department of Energy announced the launch of its “ Genesis Mission, ” a national initiative that “unites DOE National Labs, industry, academia, and more to harness AI for breakthroughs in energy dominance, discovery science, and national security.” The program aimed to quickly marshal research talent from across the country, requesting proposals to tackle 26 science and technology challenges . Now, the Genesis Mission’s first awardees have been announced, and two John and Marcia Price College of Engineering faculty members are among them: Rohan Basu Roy and Morteza Fayazi. “The Genesis Mission is pulling together the country’s best research talent to develop and apply AI to tackle some of the most urgent problems in energy, computing, and national security,” said Charles Musgrave, dean of the Price College of Engineering. “Rohan and Morteza are two exciting rising stars in the college, and being selected for this first cohort reflects both the meteoric rise of their careers and where Utah engineering is headed.” Rohan Basu Roy Rohan Basu Roy Assistant Professor Kahlert School of Computing Scientific Computing & Imaging Institute Project Title: Dispatchable Data Centers: AI-Driven Workload Flexibility for Grid-Aware Load Shaping One of the major challenges of increasing national compute capacity is the unprecedented load that AI places on the power grid. This load isn’t evenly distributed; spikes in demands shift in both time and space, making it difficult to estimate the energy costs for any one computational job. Roy and his colleagues will address this challenge by capturing and analyzing data center workloads such that they can be dynamically priced, taking advantage of temporal flexibility in the system. Their project aims to develop a runtime control plane that operates as an AI workflow with three agents: a sensing agent that estimates per-job costs, a planning agent that selects constrained actions in response, and a scenario agent that models potential grid conditions. These agents will be coordinated by an orchestrator with memory that retrains all three based on the outcomes of the actions taken. The project’s academic partners are the Rochester Institute of Technology and Argonne National Laboratory. Roy will also collaborate with industry partners PacifiCorp, Micron, NVIDIA, and Bay Compute . “Rohan is truly a rising star in high-performance computing, and this Genesis award underscores the national impact of his research,” said Manish Parashar, chief AI officer for the U and executive director of the Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute , where Roy is a core faculty member. “He is tackling the urgent challenge of balancing AI’s immense energy demands with grid stability, positioning the U at the forefront of sustainable innovation.” Reposted from the John and Marcia Price College of Engineering . Posted in General News , Large-Scale Systems Continue Reading Previous post: Redtail, Utah’s AI Factory Supercomputer, Ranks Among Fastest and Greenest Systems in the World Next post: SCI Part of a $24.5M NSF Award to Expand AI-Ready Data Infrastructure for U.S. Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute 72 So. Central Campus Drive Room 3750 SALT LAKE CITY, UT 84112 801-585-1867 © 2026 THE UNIVERSITY OF UTAH Nondiscrimination & Accessibility Disclaimer Privacy Media Contacts 