 LSO: Genesis Mission – U Research Skip to content Main Menu Home About U Research Meet The Team Advisory Committees Contact Us U Research Administration Units Research Initiatives Historical Timeline Communications & Outreach Grant Support Grant Support FAQs LIFT Pre-Award Office News & Events The Research Post U Research Events Calendar Funding Internal Funding for Researchers Internal Funding Homepage Faculty Small Grant Program (FGSP) Faculty Fellow Awards (FFA) – Reporting Portal Distinguished Research Awards (DRA) Research Instrumentation Form (RIF) University of Utah Research Foundation (UURF) Interdisciplinary Research Initiative 1U4U Collaborative Seed Grant Program Limited Submissions External Funding (PIVOT) Forms No-Cost Extension Request Instructions Research at the U Facts and Figures Utah’s Innovation Your Questions Our Research Research Administration Facilities and Administrative Distribution and Usage Search Site Powered by the University of Utah Powered by Search Campus U Research Funding Internal Funding for Researchers Limited Submissions External Funding (PIVOT) No-Cost Extension Request Instructions Research at the U Facts and Figures Utah’s Innovation Your Questions Our Research Grant Support Grant Support FAQs LIFT Pre-Award Office Mar 18 - Apr 28 LSO: Genesis Mission Limited Submission Opportunities Colleagues, The Genesis call was released March 17th. You can read more here: · Grants.gov call · Notice of Funding Opportunity and Instructions · Genesis Mission Council homepage Action Items: The DOE Genesis Mission Council (GMC) engagement process begins this week. The Partnership Exchange Portal opens March 19th and will be the primary tool for team formation. You can sign up here. Complete a quick survey by March 23rd to let the VPR know you are interested in applying. You can complete the survey here . The VPR will share survey responses with everyone who submits a response to maximize awareness . This could help with team building, strengthen proposals, and reduce internal competition. A Genesis webinar will be held March 26th at 1:00 PM (Utah time). Register for the webinar. If you are interested in leading a project, you must submit an internal application to the LSO portal by 11:59pm (MST) on Monday, March 30th, 2026. Note: Genesis has 98 focus areas. Universities can only lead 1 application per focus area . Given that, the University of Utah is conducting an internal LSO process to designate leads. Critical upcoming dates/actions: March 19th: Join the portal March 23rd: Respond to internal survey March 26th: Attend the webinar March 30th: Leaders submit to internal LSO . Resources Researcher Resources Funding Research Administration Units Office of Sponsored Projects Environmental Health and Safety Human Research Protection Program Institutional Animal Care & Use Committee Research Compliance and Integrity News & Updates The Research Post Subscribe for Updates Article Submission Form U Research 201 PRESIDENTS CIRCLE ROOM 210 | SLC, UT 84112 801-581-7236 Information Facts and Figures Meet The Team Webmaster Funding Internal Funding Limited Submissions External Funding © 2026 THE UNIVERSITY OF UTAH Nondiscrimination & Accessibility Disclaimer Privacy About the U Media Contacts 