 PsiQuantum - Building the World's First Useful Quantum Computer News: PsiQuantum finalizes $100 million award from the U.S. Department of Commerce— learn more. 0 Skip to Content Home About Technology Research Software Applications News Open Menu Close Menu Home About Technology Research Software Applications News Open Menu Close Menu Home About Technology Research Software Applications News Building the future of computing PsiQuantum is building and deploying the future of computing with the world’s first useful quantum computers. Our blueprint → Our approach Main Slider ← → Silicon photonics A world-leading silicon photonics platform designed to enable fault-tolerant quantum computing and scale compute. Learn more Blueprint A modular platform designed to scale toward commercially useful, fault-tolerant quantum computing. Learn more Applications Uncovering how utility-scale quantum computing can unlock technical breakthroughs across energy, materials, pharmaceuticals, finance, and more. Learn more Research Research from PsiQuantum's team of quantum architects, chemists, developers, engineers, and theorists. Learn more Silicon photonics 01 Blueprint 02 Applications 03 Research 04 Building the world’s first utility-scale quantum computers We are moving quantum computing out of the lab and into utility-scale infrastructure. PsiQuantum is building these platforms in partnership with the US and allied governments, with our first sites planned in the City of Moreton Bay, Queensland (Australia) and Chicago, Illinois (USA). Image Showcase Moreton Bay Central, Queensland, Australia Learn more → Illinois Quantum & Microelectronics Park - Chicago, Illinois, USA Learn more → Our path to scaling Taking a photonic approach, PsiQuantum leverages the trillions of dollars that have gone into the semiconductor manufacturing infrastructure to build Omega, our silicon photonic chipset and the foundation of PsiQuantum’s modular platform that will enable utility-scale quantum computing. Expandable Feature List Manufacturability 01 We design our own chips and manufacture our Omega chipset at GlobalFoundries flagship fab in Malta, NY. Networking 02 We scale beyond a single chip using standard telecom optical fiber — used today in conventional datacenters — without any need for transduction. Cooling Power 03 Because photons don’t feel heat or electromagnetic interference, we can colocate control electronics close to the qubit — improving system size, cost and signal integrity. Control electronics 04 Our systems allow for the integration of control electronics within modular packaging units, reducing physical complexity and minimizing the need for extensive wiring and external hardware. Purpose-built software for fault-tolerant quantum computing PsiQuantum Construct is the industry’s first comprehensive platform designed to help enterprises, governments, and researchers create fault-tolerant quantum algorithms. From visual circuit design to Python-based optimization tools, our software platform equips you to solve tomorrow’s toughest challenges today. Learn more Your browser does not support the video tag. Latest news Featured 8 September 2026 PsiQuantum Finalizes $100 Million Award with the U.S. Department of Commerce 8 September 2026 PsiQuantum announced today that the company has signed definitive documentation with the U.S. Department of Commerce for a $100 million award to strengthen American leadership in quantum computing and semiconductor supply-chain security. Read more → 8 September 2026 2 September 2026 PsiQuantum, Brookhaven Lab Partner to Accelerate Quantum Application Development Using Construct Software Tool 2 September 2026 PsiQuantum and the U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE) Brookhaven National Laboratory announced a collaboration that will leverage PsiQuantum’s software platform, Construct, to support Brookhaven Lab scientists researching new algorithms and scientific applications for the first generation of fault-tolerant quantum computers. Read more → 2 September 2026 11 August 2026 PsiQuantum Appoints Niklas Zennström to Board of Directors 11 August 2026 PsiQuantum announced today that Niklas Zennström, ​​​​​​Fou​nder and CEO ​​​of ​​​Atomico, has joined the PsiQuantum Board of Directors. Zennström brings decades of experience building, scaling, and investing in category-defining technology companies. He co-founded Skype and served as its CEO before founding Atomico in 2006. Across his career as a founder, investor, and board member, Zennström has played a major role in the growth of Europe’s technology ecosystem. Read more → 11 August 2026 22 July 2026 PsiQuantum Signs $125 Million Agreement with DARPA 22 July 2026 PsiQuantum today announced that the company has signed a new $125 million contract with the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under DARPA’s Quantum Benchmarking Initiative (QBI), the U.S. government’s most rigorous effort to evaluate commercial pathways to utility-scale quantum computing. Read more → 22 July 2026 © 2026 PsiQuantum. All rights reserved. Terms / Privacy Policy GLOBAL FACILITIES Australia Chicago United Kingdom NEWS Newsroom Press materials COMPANY Contact us Careers Construct software Government Advisory Board Other resources 