 Department of Energy selects Virginia Tech joint venture to manage and operate Jefferson Lab Jefferson Lab, one of the Department of Energy's 17 national laboratories, has been at the forefront of particle accelerator and nuclear physics research, driving discoveries that explore the fundamental structure of matter. This is the first time a university has partnered in an organization selected to manage it. virginia tech global distinction,impact,physics,college of engineering,college of science,office of the president,data science article-page --> Department of Energy selects Virginia Tech joint venture to manage and operate Jefferson Lab | Virginia Tech News | Virginia Tech Skip to main content Skip to search Virginia Tech® home Universal Access Toggle Universal Access Close Universal Access dialog Universal Access Options Report a barrier Accessibility portal Pause all background videos Underline all links Apply Visit Give Shop Hokie Sports Shop Apparel, clothing, gear and merchandise Hokie Shop University Bookstore, merchandise and gifts Hokie Gear Everything you need to know about Hokie gear Hokie License Plates Part of every Virginia Tech plate purchase funds scholarships Resources for Future Students Current Students Parents and Families Faculty and Staff Alumni Industry and Partners News VT News logo Browse Categories Categories Submenu Toggle Academics Campus Experience Culture Impact Research Videos News & Stories Magazines Notices Daily Doodle Tags Subscribe to daily email For the media Apply Visit Give Shop Hokie Sports Shop Apparel, clothing, gear and merchandise Hokie Shop University Bookstore, merchandise and gifts Hokie Gear Everything you need to know about Hokie gear Hokie License Plates Part of every Virginia Tech plate purchase funds scholarships Resources for Future Students Current Students Parents and Families Faculty and Staff Alumni Industry and Partners Instagram Facebook Linked-In Threads Youtube X Blue Sky close browse menu Search toggle Search query × search Search this site Search all vt.edu sites People search Frequent Searches: Web results for Sort by relevance Sort by date News results for Sort by relevance Sort by date Filter search Categories Academics Campus Experience Culture Impact Research Story type Feature Notice Story Video Apply filters Clear filters Video results for Sort by relevance Sort by date People results for People Results See more VT News Results See more Category: impact Department of Energy selects Virginia Tech joint venture to manage and operate Jefferson Lab By Lon Wagner 27 Apr 2026 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Copy address link to clipboard An aerial image of Newport News with the York River on the horizon. The Jefferson Lab’s Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility is outlined in the lower central area. Photo courtesy of Jefferson Lab. The U.S. Department of Energy has selected Virginia Tech and the Southeastern Universities Research Association (SURA) to manage and operate the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility in Newport News, one of the nation’s leading nuclear physics research laboratories. The contract marks a new chapter for Jefferson Lab’s scientific mission and continued leadership in discovery and innovation. SURATech, the name for the new management group, is a joint venture between Virginia Tech and SURA, bringing together the strengths of both organizations to support Jefferson Lab’s long-standing tradition of scientific excellence. The partnership reflects a shared commitment to advancing fundamental research, fostering collaboration, expanding opportunities for the global scientific community, and giving students hands-on science and technology experiences. “Virginia Tech is proud to partner in this effort to lead one of the nation’s premier research facilities,” said Virginia Tech President Tim Sands. “As part of SURATech, we’re ready to support Jefferson Lab’s mission and push the boundaries of discovery in ways that benefit the commonwealth, nation, and world. “This is the result of continued support from our state legislators and governor. Their strategic investments in Jefferson Lab, including a new High Performance Data Facility, spur job creation and education across the commonwealth," Sands said. “Jefferson Lab has an extraordinary legacy of scientific achievement and a bold vision for the future,” said Sean Hearne, president and chief executive officer of SURA. “We are honored that the Department of Energy has selected SURATech to support the laboratory’s mission and to help advance groundbreaking research that deepens our understanding of the universe. ” Since its founding, Jefferson Lab has been at the forefront of particle accelerator and nuclear physics research, driving discoveries that explore the fundamental structure of matter. Its world-class facilities, talented workforce, and vibrant scientific user community have positioned the laboratory as a global leader in science and innovation. This is the first time a university has partnered in an organization selected to manage Jefferson Lab, one of the Department of Energy's 17 national laboratories. “We are excited for Virginia Tech to bring its expertise in science, engineering, and computation to a premier national facility located right here in Virginia,” said Dan Sui, the university's senior vice president for research and innovation. "We are proud to join a distinguished group of universities entrusted with the management and operations responsibilities for our national laboratories, including Princeton, Stanford, the University of Chicago, and the University of California system.” Hardware collecting scientific data runs inside the Jefferson Lab data center as the lab’s scientific computing operations manager, Bryan Hess, checks on the equipment. Photo courtesy of Jefferson Lab. Jefferson Lab employs about 840 people and operates with an annual budget of approximately $238 million. Jefferson Lab is moving toward becoming a multi-purpose laboratory with the creation of a new High Performance Data Facility based in Virginia where the research will be an integral part of the nation’s data science program. In partnership with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California, this $300 million-plus computing and data infrastructure resource will accelerate the pace of scientific discovery by providing users unprecedented data analysis, networking and storage resources. The data facility is critically aligned with the recently launched Genesis Mission, led by the Department of Energy, to transform American science and innovation through the power of artificial intelligence. A new vision The SURATech partnership brings together deep experience in managing large-scale scientific enterprises with a strong network of university and industry partners. Virginia Tech brings a wealth of that type of national leadership. Kevin Pitts, dean of the College of Science, previously served as chief research officer at Fermilab National Accelerator Facility in Illinois. Pitts was integral in the process to develop the team and proposal for this new partnership. In addition, eight other universities in Virginia will become part of the Spark Joint Institute at Jefferson Lab: Christopher Newport University, George Mason University, Hampton University, Norfolk State University, Old Dominion University, University of Virginia, Virginia Commonwealth University, and William & Mary. This collaborative model will strengthen operational excellence while expanding opportunities for research, education, and workforce development. Looking ahead, SURATech will focus on supporting Jefferson Lab’s workforce, enhancing collaboration across the scientific community, and advancing the groundbreaking research that defines the laboratory’s mission. In addition to the existing thrusts in particle accelerator and nuclear science research, this partnership will further efforts across Virginia in artificial intelligence, data science, and quantum information. Working in close partnership with the DOE, universities, and industry collaborators, the team aims to build on Jefferson Lab’s legacy and accelerate discovery for the benefit of society. Contact: Lindsey Haugh Tags College of Engineering College of Science Data Science Impact Office of the President Physics Virginia Tech Global Distinction Share this story Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Copy address link to clipboard Related Content --> Article Item New research rethinks plastic from the inside out , article --> Article Item Virginia Cooperative Extension awards highlight innovation and impact across Virginia , article --> Video Item Inside the cab: An immersive approach to driver training , video Global Impact Virginia Tech demonstrates impact as a global land grant – progressing sustainability in our community, through the Commonwealth of Virginia, and around the world. More Stories Subscribe to get the daily email Get Directions See All Locations Contact Virginia Tech University Status Privacy Statement Acceptable Use We Remember University Libraries Accessibility Consumer Information Cost & Aid SAFE at VT Policies Equal Opportunity WVTF University Bookstore Jobs at Virginia Tech For the media © 2026 Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. All rights reserved. Instagram Facebook Linked-In Threads Youtube X Blue Sky 