 University receives $20 million grant for cloud-based semiconductor lab As part of a nationwide network of AI-enabled autonomous laboratories, Virginia Tech will make use its remotely accessible labs to strengthen U.S. semiconductor innovation, manufacturing resilience, and workforce development. advanced research computing,top news,faculty excellence,sanghani center for artificial intelligence and data analytics,research,semiconductor,computer science,institute for critical technology and applied science,industry innovation and infrastructure,college of engineering,college of science,industrial and systems engineering,office of the president,faculty and staff,statistics,honors and awards,national science foundation,commonwealth cyber initiative southwest virginia node,commonwealth cyber initiative,electrical and computer engineering article-page --> University receives $20 million grant for cloud-based semiconductor lab | Virginia Tech News | Virginia Tech Skip to main content Skip to search Virginia Tech® home Universal Access Toggle Universal Access Close Universal Access dialog Universal Access Options Report a barrier Accessibility portal Pause all background videos Underline all links Apply Visit Give Shop Hokie Sports Shop Apparel, clothing, gear and merchandise Hokie Shop University Bookstore, merchandise and gifts Hokie Gear Everything you need to know about Hokie gear Hokie License Plates Part of every Virginia Tech plate purchase funds scholarships Resources for Future Students Current Students Parents and Families Faculty and Staff Alumni Industry and Partners News VT News logo Browse Categories Categories Submenu Toggle Academics Campus Experience Culture Impact Research Videos News & Stories Magazines Notices Daily Doodle Tags Subscribe to daily email For the media Apply Visit Give Shop Hokie Sports Shop Apparel, clothing, gear and merchandise Hokie Shop University Bookstore, merchandise and gifts Hokie Gear Everything you need to know about Hokie gear Hokie License Plates Part of every Virginia Tech plate purchase funds scholarships Resources for Future Students Current Students Parents and Families Faculty and Staff Alumni Industry and Partners Instagram Facebook Linked-In Threads Youtube X Blue Sky close browse menu Search toggle Search query × search Search this site Search all vt.edu sites People search Frequent Searches: Web results for Sort by relevance Sort by date News results for Sort by relevance Sort by date Filter search Categories Academics Campus Experience Culture Impact Research Story type Feature Notice Story Video Apply filters Clear filters Video results for Sort by relevance Sort by date People results for People Results See more VT News Results See more Category: research University receives $20 million grant for cloud-based semiconductor lab By Hannah Williams 4 Aug 2026 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Copy address link to clipboard Wei Zhou teaches a semiconductor processing course in Virginia Tech’s Micro-/Nanofabrication Cleanroom and Laboratory. Photo by Lee Friesland for Virginia Tech. Wei Zhou teaches a semiconductor processing course in Virginia Tech’s Micro-/Nanofabrication Cleanroom and Laboratory. Photo by Lee Friesland for Virginia Tech. A team of Virginia Tech researchers received a $20 million grant from the U.S. National Science Foundation to establish an artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled cloud-based semiconductor laboratory. The Virginia Tech Programmable Cloud Laboratory (PCL) Node will allow the team to make the university’s semiconductor facilities remotely accessible to a range of users as part of a nationwide network of AI-enabled automated laboratories. As one of 20 teams to receive funding in what the National Science Foundation calls "a core ... contribution to the U.S. government's Genesis Mission, a national effort to harness AI for scientific discovery ," Virginia Tech will use its PCL Node to strengthen U.S. semiconductor innovation, manufacturing resilience, and workforce development. “The chance of this serving the larger population is great,” said Professor Rose Hu, head of the Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) and the project’s principal investigator. “Ultimately, the goal is for all 20 nodes to be made accessible across the entire United States. Broadened access is the whole purpose of building this powerful network.” Hu compared the project to the computer networking experimentation done throughout the late 20th century: What began as four computer nodes initially restricted to academic research later became the internet as we know it today. In the same way, the team anticipates that the new network of remote laboratories, including Virginia Tech's PCL Node, will expand job opportunities and access to scientific research, especially for underserved rural communities. Students from a variety of disciplines and universities will be able to access the node to conduct research and build skills with advanced semiconductor equipment unavailable at their home institutions. The node also will be accessible to startups and small businesses without their own equipment through the Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business Technology Transfer programs, two federal initiatives that support research development and technology commercialization. Rather than unsupervised, remote operation, this access would be secure, structured, and supported by trained facility personnel. Rose Hu (at left) and Wei Zhou discuss semiconductor fabrication outside of Virginia Tech’s Micro-/Nanofabrication Cleanroom and Laboratory. Photo by Priyam Shrivastava for Virginia Tech. Rose Hu (at left) and Wei Zhou discuss semiconductor fabrication outside of Virginia Tech’s Micro-/Nanofabrication Cleanroom and Laboratory. Photo by Priyam Shrivastava for Virginia Tech. The research team Hu is collaborating closely with faculty members and co-principal investigators across Virginia Tech, including: Wei Zhou, associate professor in electrical and computer engineering, director of the Micro-/Nanofabrication Cleanroom and Laboratory , and special advisor to the senior vice president for research and innovation for AI-guided semiconductor manufacturing and nanotechnology Zhenyu “James” Kong, the Ralph H. Bogle Jr. Professor in the Grado Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering and an executive member of Virginia Tech Made Matthew Hull, research professor and director of the Nanoscale Characterization and Fabrication Laboratory within the Institute for Critical Technology and Applied Science Alberto Cano, associate professor in computer science and associate vice president for Advanced Research Computing Connecting semiconductor design, fabrication, and testing Semiconductors are tiny devices that form the foundation of modern electronics, from smartphones and data centers to vehicles and medical systems. Developing new semiconductor devices often requires iterative, expert-guided work in design, fabrication, characterization, and data analysis. These cycles can be time-consuming and difficult to reproduce across tools and facilities. The primary goal of Virginia Tech’s PCL Node is to transform these labor-intensive work cycles into AI-guided workflows that make micro/nanodevice production faster, repeatable, and easier to predict. The node will use resources from the university's Micro-/Nanofabrication Cleanroom and Laboratory, Nanoscale Characterization and Fabrication Laboratory (NCFL), and Advanced Research Computing to accomplish this. “For nearly 20 years, the NCFL has provided critical infrastructure and personnel supporting some of Virginia Tech’s most prestigious research programs,” Hull said. “For the PCL node, our NCFL team will support users’ analytical needs and leverage our unique experience scaling networked user access programs through the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure .” Nanoscale Characterization and Fabrication Lab manager Jarret Wright analyzes a user-provided sample using an advanced electron microscope. The PCL program will make critical tools and workflows more accessible to users across the nation. Photo by Amber Yost for Virginia Tech. Nanoscale Characterization and Fabrication Lab manager Jarret Wright analyzes a user-provided sample using an advanced electron microscope. The Programmable Cloud Laboratory program will make critical tools and workflows more accessible to users across the nation. Photo by Amber Yost for Virginia Tech. The node's shared infrastructure includes advanced fabrication tools, digital twin models, high-performance computing, a sharable data system, and more. Zhou said the facilities derive value not only from specialized instruments, but also from validated process recipes, experienced engineers and staff, calibration and maintenance programs, contamination controls, environmental health and safety procedures, and coordinated fabrication-to-characterization expertise. “The machines in ECE’s clean room, together with the NCFL and Advanced Research Computing, provide a nanofabrication, characterization, and computing infrastructure useful for semiconductor device innovation,” Kong said. “But they’re currently in a fragmented setting and challenging to use in a connected and holistic way. This program is meant to bring siloed tools and devices online and apply AI machine learning to make processes more automated, easy to use, and remotely accessible.” An advanced micro-/nanofabrication tool used to etch semiconductor, photonic, and sensing materials. Photo by Nathaniel Cranfield for Virginia Tech. An advanced micro-/nanofabrication tool used to etch semiconductor, photonic, and sensing materials. Photo by Nathaniel Cranfield for Virginia Tech. Accelerating scientific innovation and discovery Virginia Tech’s investments in research computing and AI can directly impact scientific innovation, Cano said. The team’s responsibility is to provide infrastructure that enables AI-driven science and supports a national research community working together to facilitate discovery. This work to improve semiconductor manufacturing across the country has the potential to translate into increasingly efficient domestic supply chains and more reliable, less expensive technology, including laptops, cellphones, and medical imaging tools. “We’re excited to bring Virginia Tech’s nanofabrication clean room facility and advanced materials-device characterization capabilities into a new era of research and deepen collaboration among universities, national laboratories, and industry,” Zhou said. “The improved infrastructure is expected to accelerate research, broaden access to advanced tools, prepare an AI-ready workforce, and translate lab discoveries into reproducible and scalable technologies.” The PCL Node is led by Virginia Tech in collaboration with various partners. Virginia Tech partners Randy Heflin, professor of physics, senior associate vice president for research and innovation John Morris, professor in chemistry, associate dean for research in the College of Science Zin Lin, assistant professor in electrical and computer engineering Xinwei Deng, professor in statistics Xuan Wang, assistant professor in computer science Eric Burger, research director for the Commonwealth Cyber Initiative Educational partners Harvard University The University of Maryland The University of Texas at Austin Virginia State University Northern Virginia Community College George Mason University Virginia Alliance for Semiconductor Technology Laboratory partners Oak Ridge National Laboratory National Institute of Standards and Technology Industry partners NVIDIA Amazon Web Services PhysicsX Matlantis Micron Tokyo Electron Thermo Fisher Scientific JEOL KLA/SPTS Kurt J. Lesker Zeiss Solutions Contact: Chelsea Seeber 540-231-2108 Tags Advanced Research Computing College of Engineering College of Science Commonwealth Cyber Initiative Commonwealth Cyber Initiative, Southwest Virginia Node Computer Science Electrical and Computer Engineering Faculty Excellence Faculty and Staff Honors and Awards Industrial and Systems Engineering Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure Institute for Critical Technology and Applied Science National Science Foundation Office of the President Research Sanghani Center for Artificial Intelligence and Data Analytics Semiconductor Statistics Top News Share this story Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Copy address link to clipboard Related Content --> Article Item A career of service: Kim O’Rourke to retire after 48 years at Virginia Tech , article --> Article Item New research rethinks plastic from the inside out , article --> Video Item The journey begins: First week at Virginia Tech Engineering , video Related Content --> Article Item New research rethinks plastic from the inside out , article --> Article Item Pinar Yanardag receives NSF CAREER award to democratize video production with artificial intelligence , article --> Video Item The journey begins: First week at Virginia Tech Engineering , video Global Impact Virginia Tech demonstrates impact as a global land grant – progressing sustainability in our community, through the Commonwealth of Virginia, and around the world. More Stories Subscribe to get the daily email Get Directions See All Locations Contact Virginia Tech University Status Privacy Statement Acceptable Use We Remember University Libraries Accessibility Consumer Information Cost & Aid SAFE at VT Policies Equal Opportunity WVTF University Bookstore Jobs at Virginia Tech For the media © 2026 Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. All rights reserved. Instagram Facebook Linked-In Threads Youtube X Blue Sky 