 Carolina researchers probe the universe’s origins | UNC-Chapel Hill Close Alert Message Alert Carolina! Normal The University is currently operating under normal conditions Last updated at 3:33am Sunday, August 23rd, 2026 Skip to Main Content Top Level Navigation Stories Stories The Well: Carolina News Accolades Campus Life Artificial Intelligence Arts and Humanities Athletics Health and Medicine Innovation and Entrepreneurship Military and Veterans Research Public Service University News Discover Discover About the University Display Sub Menu for About the University About the University Branding and Identity Guidelines Opens in new site By the numbers For the Media Opens in new site Leadership Mission & Values UNC System Opens in new site Academics Display Sub Menu for Academics Academics Academic Calendar and Registrar Accessibility Admissions and Aid Alumni Arts and Culture Athletics Calendar Global Opens in new site History and Traditions Innovation at Carolina Library Life at Carolina Research Schools Display Sub Menu for Schools Schools College of Arts and Sciences Adams School of Dentistry Civic Life and Leadership Opens in new site Data and Information Sciences Education Eshelman School of Pharmacy Gillings School of Global Public Health Government The Graduate School Hussman School of Journalism and Media Law Kenan-Flagler Business School Medicine Nursing Social Work Summer School Social Media UNC Health Opens in new site University Development Opens in new site Visit Working at Carolina Opens in new site Search The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Hide Main Navigation Menu Featured Provost column: Research is Carolina’s mission There’s no fool like The Motley Fool News and Updates Academics Accolades Alumni Campus Life Arts & Humanities Athletics Events Calendar Global Health & Medicine Innovation & Entrepreneurship Leadership Research University News Search People Opens in new window Places Opens in new window Search UNC.edu Research Carolina researchers probe the universe’s origins Through its new Genesis Mission, the U.S. Department of Energy may fund the scientific discoveries of two faculty members. By Calley Jones, UNC College of Arts and Sciences, Thursday, August 20th, 2026 Julieta Gruszko is the lead researcher on a project selected for possible funding through the Genesis Mission led by the U.S. Department of Energy. (Submitted photo) Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Pinterest Share via Email Print Friendly UNC-Chapel Hill physicists searching for clues about the origin of the universe have been selected for possible funding through a new U.S. Department of Energy grant to address challenges spanning science and energy using artificial intelligence. Physics and astronomy associate professor Julieta Gruszko and professor Reyco Henning in the UNC College of Arts and Sciences study why the universe contains more matter than antimatter when traditional laws of physics state that the two should be equal. This mystery is one of the most intriguing questions in modern physics, and its answer may lie in a process a radioactive atom can undergo called beta decay. A special type of beta decay that could produce two particles— with no antiparticles to balance them out — is possible in theory but has never been observed. Gruszko and Henning are part of LEGEND , an international collaboration of around 60 institutions working together to develop the largest experiment in history for the study of this process. Much more painstaking than the proverbial hunt for a needle in a haystack, detecting it will take time and massive computational resources. Fortunately, the new federal funding program called the Genesis Mission was built to tackle problems just like this. The Genesis Mission is a historic national initiative led by the DOE, which is building the world’s most powerful integrated science discovery platform. By uniting government, industry, academia and philanthropy, it is accelerating breakthroughs in energy, scientific discovery and national security through a new platform that combines artificial intelligence, supercomputing, quantum systems and advanced scientific instruments. Gruszko has been integrating machine learning into her research since joining the faculty at UNC-Chapel Hill. “My work already involved maximizing information extraction from our experiments to make things more efficient,” she said. “AI became the logical outgrowth of that.” Gruszko’s project aims to improve how researchers simulate the possible outcomes of real-life experiments. To better separate relevant findings from signals produced by naturally occurring radiation, Gruszko’s team uses a system in which background signals produce flashes of light. However, to best interpret the results, they need to know what those flashes will look like under different experimental conditions. Currently, these simulations require abundant time and computing power, which limits the number of simulations researchers can run. In collaboration with Henning and investigators at the University of California San Diego, Oak Ridge National Laboratory and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Gruszko plans to develop a surrogate model — an AI model trained on previous successful simulations. Between this new model and some planned hardware updates, Gruszko intends to speed up the simulation process by a factor of 100. Gruszko and Henning are also co-investigators on another study aimed at streamlining data collection for LEGEND. One of Gruszko’s former graduate students developed an AI-guided method that can better sort energy signals from background noise. The project, led by Gruszko’s collaborators at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, aims to adapt this system to run on the experimental hardware itself so that it can remove background noise from the data before it is exported to the researchers. Searches at lower energy levels could potentially detect other things for which physicists have long searched, including dark matter and particles with fractions of the charge of an electron. “There are all of these proposed physics concepts beyond the standard model — new physics we’d like to be looking for, but we’re not,” Gruszko said. “For me, the big picture is to make it easier for everyone to use AI when it’s appropriate, use traditional models when they’re appropriate and combine the two in a seamless way.” Learn more about Gruszko’s research. Categories College of Arts and Sciences , Faculty and Staff , Research , Science & Nature Keep Reading This Ireland native is a Tar Heel for life You May Also Like... Carolina researchers developing world’s largest sky-survey telescope Construction has begun on the Argus Array, a project led by professor Nicholas Law and funded by Schmidt Sciences and XTX Markets founder Alex Gerko. Graduate student discovers youngest transiting planet ever Identified by Carolina astronomer Madyson Barber, the “baby” planet is 3 million years old and roughly the size of Jupiter. The Well: Carolina news delivered to your inbox ↗ Want more Carolina news? The Well newsletter updates Tar Heels on UNC-Chapel Hill’s top stories, upcoming events and campus accolades, arriving in your inbox every Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday morning. UNC Health, Duke Health partner on new children’s hospital NC Children’s will be North Carolina’s first freestanding hospital dedicated to caring for kids. #GDTBATH: Mel Dalili The Carolina sophomore shares her life through her poems, tours and activities on campus. Nutritionist connects research from Galapagos to Helene relief Heather Wasser focuses her work on safe infant feeding, a concern after the storm hit western North Carolina. Biology student’s quick response saves a life During a BIOL 119 hospital shift, Neha Varrier did CPR on a patient until help arrived. Try this one study hack: Peer Tutoring This fall, nearly a thousand Tar Heels got help from fellow students through this free Learning Center program. Accessibility Alert Carolina Alumni ConnectCarolina Campus Map Contact Us Careers Departments A – Z University Policy For the Media Libraries People Directory Privacy Statement UNC Student Stores The Well Instagram LinkedIn Facebook YouTube TikTok Twitter © 2026 The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Share This Facebook LinkedIn Share on Mastodon Enter your Mastodon instance URL (optional) Share 