 Hengen applies lessons from brain to quantum sensing - The Source - WashU Skip to content The Source Close Topics Topics Arts & Culture Business & Entrepreneurship Campus & Community Humanities & Society Medicine & Health Science & Technology Schools Schools Arts & Sciences Brown School Bursky School of Public Health McKelvey School of Engineering Olin Business School Sam Fox School of Design & Visual Arts School of Continuing & Professional Studies School of Law School of Medicine Publications Publications Newsroom The Record WashU Magazine Search Menu Search for: Search Close THE RECORD Sections Announcements Notables Obituaries Research Wire The View From Here Washington People Hengen applies lessons from brain to quantum sensing By Chris Woolston August 24, 2026 SHARE Keith Hengen , an associate professor of biology in WashU Arts & Sciences, studies the brain’s computational power. He’s now turning that knowledge toward a new endeavor: developing quantum sensors for next-generation computing. Hengen Hengen and Whitney Armstrong, a physicist at Argonne National Laboratory, are co-principal investigators of a project called “Superconducting Polychronous Computation Near Criticality.” In late July, the U.S. Department of Energy awarded $750,000 to Hengen and Armstrong as part of its Genesis Mission , a collection of research projects designed to “deliver breakthroughs to secure American energy dominance, accelerate scientific discovery and strengthen national security.” Key to this work will be Hengen’s research on criticality, a way to describe “a complex system when it’s balanced at the tipping point between order and chaos,” he said. “At criticality, information processing is maximized. For obvious reasons, we believe the brain must be tuned near criticality for optimal thinking and learning,” Hengen said. The idea is that concept could help increase the accuracy and reduce the energy consumption of quantum sensors, allowing the team to use quantum sensors to solve complex computational problems. Learn more about his latest effort on the Ampersand website . SHARE Media Contact Leah Shaffer Sections Research Wire Topics Biology Data & Computer Science Medicine & Health Neuroscience & Memory Schools Arts & Sciences Read more stories from Arts & Sciences Visit Arts & Sciences You Might Also Like Hengen wins NIH grant to study sleep’s role in Alzheimer’s treatment April 22, 2026 Published In Record Understanding criticality and the brain’s neural networks October 7, 2019 Published In Newsroom Stories Tendon variations’ effects on mechanics to get a closer look July 21, 2026 Published In Record Latest from the Record Announcements WashU Olin Business launches five new MBA scholarships New master’s in artificial intelligence engineering offered at WashU WashU hosts polling places Notables Kim-Yu wins Newcombe dissertation fellowship Mellnick, Itani named to radiology senior leadership positions Barmash elected president of National Association of Professors of Hebrew Obituaries Katherine Parker Ponder, professor emerita of hematology, 69 Kennedy Reed, graduate student at WashU Medicine, 26 Guoyan Zhao, associate professor of genetics, neurology, 53 Research Wire Grant funds hybrid system that could spur vast energy improvements to computing Scientists identify genes that could reduce APOE4 Alzheimer’s disease risk AI agents prompt redesign of web for security, privacy, reliability The View From Here 08.26.26 07.15.26 06.24.26 Washington People Hester Blum Danielle Dutton and Martin Riker Helina Woldekiros Who Knew WashU? Who Knew WashU? 1.27.21 Who Knew WashU? 1.13.21 Who Knew WashU? 12.9.20 Publications WashU Magazine --> Newsroom Record Explore Bookshelf Podcasts Video Gallery Connect Media Resources Contact Facebook Instagram ©2026 Washington University in St. Louis Go back to top 