 DOE Funds Duke-Led AI Platform to Design Transformative DNA-Based Materials | Duke Pratt School of Engineering DOE Funds Duke-Led AI Platform to Design Transformative DNA-Based Materials | --> Apply Menu Who We Are Our Story Our Story Dean’s Welcome Advancing Society: Our Strategic Vision Pratt 2039 Strategic Plan History Culture & Belonging Character Forward Our Team Dean’s Office Staff Board of Visitors Full Directory Careers Visit Us Awards & Recognition External Faculty Awards NAE Members Pratt School of Engineering Awards Admissions Undergraduate Undergraduate Admissions First-Year Design Undergraduate Student Outcomes Master's Master’s Admissions Master’s Student Outcomes PhD PhD Admissions PhD Student Outcomes Alumni & Student Profiles Financial Support Admitted Students International Students Campus Tours Academics Departments Biomedical Engineering Civil & Environmental Engineering Electrical & Computer Engineering Mechanical Engineering & Materials Science Institute for Enterprise Engineering Faculty Undergraduate Undergraduate Experience General Degree Requirements Policies & Procedures Majors & Minors 4+1: Bachelors & Master’s Program Your First Year Student Entrepreneurship Undergraduate Research Master's Master’s Experience Master’s Degrees PhD Certificates Life at Pratt Life at Pratt Organizations & Clubs Life in Durham Alumni & Student Profiles Student Resources Undergraduate Student Resources Graduate Student Resources Advising Internships & Career Services PhD Plus Professional Development Research & Impact Pre-Research Support High-Impact Research Signature Research Areas Centers & Institutes Translation Signature Discoveries Entrepreneurship Military Innovation Community-Based Innovation 2025 Impact Report News & Events News Media Coverage Media Hits Media Relations Publications Magazines Email Newsletters Rate of Change Podcast Events All Events Commencement 2026 Discover Engineering @ Duke | April 2026 NAE Regional Meeting | May 2026 Search Submit Alumni & Parents Alumni Parents Giving Industry Industry Engagement Student Engagement Affiliates Program Give Directory Apply DOE Funds Duke-Led AI Platform to Design Transformative DNA-Based Materials By Ken Kingery 7/23/26 Research 4 min read Duke engineers are leading a Phase 1 Genesis project funded by the Department of Energy to develop an AI platform capable of designing large-scale DNA-based materials for next generation energy technologies. SHARE Twitter/X Logo LinkedIn Logo Facebook Logo DOE Funds Duke-Led AI Platform to Design Transformative DNA-Based Materials A team of researchers led by engineers at Duke University have been awarded a Phase 1 Genesis grant from the Department of Energy to develop an AI platform to accelerate the design of hierarchically ordered DNA-based materials with critical applications in photonic, electronic and catalytic systems. The research project is led by Gaurav Arya , professor of mechanical engineering and materials science at Duke, and also includes Stefan Zauscher , professor of mechanical engineering and materials science at Duke; Yonggang Ke, associate professor of biomedical engineering at Georgia Tech and Emory University; and Stephen Whitelam, staff scientist focusing on the theory of nanostructured materials at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. “Although individual DNA origami structures have enabled important advances in areas such as drug delivery, biosensing and nanophotonics, their small size fundamentally limits many emerging applications,” Arya said. “Scaling these nanoscale building blocks into programmable, large periodic lattices of the origami structures would unlock a new class of functional biomolecular materials.” A microscopic view of a real-world example of 3D DNA origami using a 16 helix bundle for nanotechnology . Most people are familiar with the DNA double-helix. Its twisted ladder shape forms because the long pieces of DNA that make up our genome are exactly complementary—every adenine paired to a thymine, and every cytosine paired to a guanine. Sequences of these four nucleotides hold the information needed to build the proteins in our bodies, but they also encode their own helical structure. Since the 1980s, scientists have hijacked these pairing rules to build structures other than double helices. This field is called DNA nanotechnology, and its most popular implementation, DNA origami, lets researchers fold DNA into any shape, providing a powerful approach for building nanoscale devices and machines as well as designing new types of biomaterials. Scaling these nanoscale building blocks into programmable, large periodic lattices of the origami structures would unlock a new class of functional biomolecular materials. Gaurav Arya Professor of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science at Duke University LinkedIn Logo Google Logo Globe Pointer Logo While the fabrication of individual DNA origami nanostructures, typically smaller than 100 nanometers, is now well established, programming these building blocks to spontaneously self-assemble into much larger, highly ordered architectures spanning tens of micrometers or beyond remains a major challenge. An even greater challenge is the inverse design problem: determining the geometry and interaction patterns of DNA origami building blocks that will reliably self-assemble into a user-specified target architecture. Solving this problem is the central objective of the new Genesis Project grant. The research effort will develop an AI framework that automatically designs DNA origami building blocks to assemble into user-specified superlattice architectures. To train the AI models, the researchers will combine large-scale computer simulations, high-throughput experiments and machine learning to uncover the relationships between building block design and self-assembled structure. Starting with 2D DNA origami tiles, the framework will eventually be expanded to include 3D, multicomponent assemblies with tailored structural and functional properties. “By dramatically accelerating the discovery of programmable nanostructured materials, this project will enable new approaches for designing energy-relevant photonic, plasmonic, electronic and catalytic materials,” Arya said. “We’re just beginning to tap into this enormous design space, and we expect the novel materials that result from this effort will greatly impact industries such as energy production, chemical manufacturing and even quantum computing.” The Genesis Mission is a historic national initiative led by the U.S. Department of Energy, which is building the world’s most powerful integrated science discovery platform. By uniting government, industry, academia and philanthropy, it is accelerating breakthroughs in energy, scientific discovery and national security through a new platform that combines AI, supercomputing, quantum systems and advanced scientific instruments. The goal of the Phase I awards is to identify promising pathways toward transformative scientific capabilities and establish a foundation for future investment and scale. Project teams will design and demonstrate research workflows that integrate AI with scientific investigation, while rigorously evaluating whether those approaches can accelerate discovery, improve predictive capabilities, enhance experimentation or generate new scientific insights. Phase I awards range from $500,000 to $750,000 and support projects for nine months. Phase II awards range from $6 million to $15 million over a three-year project period. Related News 7/22 Research DOE-Funded Brain-Inspired Hardware to Enable Futuristic Robotic Systems Duke engineers are leading a Phase 1 Genesis project funded by the Department of Energy to develop robotic AI processing hardware 10x faster and 100x more efficient than today’s top performers. 4/17/24 Pratt School of Engineering Capturing DNA Origami Folding with a New Dynamic Model Coarser modeling approach allows researchers to better understand the process by which DNA folds into engineered nanoscale structures to speed innovation 7/15/25 Pratt School of Engineering How AI is Rewriting the Rules of Materials Discovery Duke’s Artificial Intelligence for Materials (aiM) program trains graduate students to use AI to accelerate materials discovery. Duke Pratt School of Engineering Logo --> 305 Teer Engineering Bldg Box 90271 Durham, NC 27708 Duke Engineering Now Newsletter Email Subscribe Visit Contact Us Emergency Information Human Resources Faculty Governance Engineering Faculty Council Pratt Intranet Accessibility Report a Web Problem © Copyright 2026 — All Rights Reserved --> Cookie Consent This website uses cookies as well as similar tools and technologies to understand visitors' experiences. By continuing to use this website, you consent to Duke University's usage of cookies and similar technologies, in accordance with the Duke Privacy Statement . Preferences Reject All Accept All Cookie Preferences × Manage your cookie preferences below: Toggle Essential Essential Essential cookies enable basic functions and are necessary for the proper function of the website. Name Description Duration Cookie Preferences This cookie is used to store the user's cookie consent preferences. 30 days Toggle Google reCAPTCHA Google reCAPTCHA Google reCAPTCHA helps protect websites from spam and abuse by verifying user interactions through challenges. Name Description Duration _GRECAPTCHA Google reCAPTCHA sets a necessary cookie (_GRECAPTCHA) when executed for the purpose of providing its risk analysis. 179 days Toggle Google Tag Manager Google Tag Manager Google Tag Manager simplifies the management of marketing tags on your website without code changes. Name Description Duration td Registers statistical data on users' behaviour on the website. Used for internal analytics by the website operator. session cookiePreferences Registers cookie preferences of a user 2 years Accept All Close Save and Close 