 Quantinuum | About Products & Solutions Quantum Computers Quantinuum Systems Discover the world’s highest performing quantum computers System Model H1 Our first-generation quantum computer with a linear architecture System Model H2 Our second-generation quantum computer with a racetrack architecture Helios Our Hardware-as-a-Service provides access on-premise, in the cloud, or both Hardware Roadmap Explore our accelerated roadmap aimed at advancing commercial quantum computing SOlutions Quantum Origin Our advanced quantum random number generator (QRNG), designed to strengthen encryption and protect data InQuanto Accelerate quantum computational chemistry for complex molecular & materials simulations Nexus All-in-one quantum computing platform for accessing and managing the highest performance full-stack Cloud Access Explore using our world-leading quantum hardware for commercial applications Developer Tools TKET Develop and execute gate-level quantum computation Guppy Program the next generation of quantum computers with our purpose-built language hosted in Python Lambeq Experiment with the structural relationships between quantum theory and natural languages Research Research Areas Discover the vast landscape of our scientific expertise Technical Blog Get educated on the world of quantum computing Publications Explore research and journal publications from our scientific teams Company About Quantinuum Learn more about the world’s largest integrated quantum computing company Careers Join us in the center of gravity for quantum computing Contact Us Get in touch with our team Investors Visit our Investor Relations site News Press Releases See how Quantinuum is pushing the boundaries in the world of quantum Blog Taking steps forward across the quantum computing landscape Glossary Better understand quantum computing with these terms and definitions Community Q-Net Join our user community aimed at shared learning, support and collaboration for our full-stack technologies Events Find out where we’ll be next Startup Partner Program Pioneering startups connect with us to accelerate ecosystem innovation and access our world-leading technologies Let's Talk Button Text lets talk Get Access Products & Solutions Quantum Computers Quantinuum Systems Discover the world’s highest performing quantum computers System Model H1 Our first-generation quantum computer with a linear architecture System Model H2 Our latest-generation quantum computer with a racetrack architecture Helios Our Hardware-as-a-Service provides access on-premise, in the cloud, or both Hardware Roadmap Explore our accelerated roadmap aimed at advancing commercial quantum computing SOlutions Quantum Origin Our advanced quantum random number generator (QRNG), designed to strengthen encryption and protect data InQuanto Accelerate quantum computational chemistry and for complex molecular & materials simulations Nexus (Beta) All-in-one quantum computing platform for accessing and managing the highest performance full-stack Cloud Access Explore using our world-leading quantum hardware for commercial applications Developer Tools TKET Develop and execute gate-level quantum computation Lambeq Experiment with the structural relationships between quantum theory and natural languages Qermit Run error-mitigation protocols on quantum processors Research Research Areas Discover the vast landscape of our scientific expertise Technical Blog Get educated on the world of quantum computing Publications Explore research and journal publications from our scientific teams Company About Quantinuum Learn more about the world’s largest integrated quantum computing company Careers Join us in the center of gravity for quantum computing Contact Us Get in touch with our team Investors Visit our Investor Relations site News Press Releases See how Quantinuum is pushing the boundaries in the world of quantum Blog Taking steps forward across the quantum computing landscape Events Find out where we’ll be next Glossary Better understand quantum computing with these terms and definitions Community Q-Net Join our user community aimed at shared learning, support and collaboration for our full-stack technologies Startup Partner Program Pioneering startups connect with us to accelerate ecosystem innovation and access our world-leading technologies Get Access Get Access Let's Talk Get Access Pioneering the next era of computing As the world’s largest integrated quantum company, Quantinuum is leading the development of the most powerful quantum computers and the most advanced quantum software solutions. With our full-stack technology and world-class scientists, we are rapidly scaling quantum computing to solve tomorrow’s biggest challenges. ‍ We are making the impossible possible. Our Mission: To accelerate quantum computing and use its power to positively transform the world By applying the laws of quantum physics to computing, we will achieve unprecedented breakthroughs in drug discovery, healthcare, materials science, cybersecurity, energy transformation, and more. ‍ ‍ True to the science, true to each other ‍ enterprise leadership scientific leadership board of directors enterprise leadership Dr. Rajeeb “Raj” Hazra President, Chief Executive Officer & Director Dr. Rajeeb “Raj” Hazra President, Chief Executive Officer & Director Dr. Hazra is the President and CEO of Quantinuum and has more than three decades of experience in supercomputing, quantum, and technical roles across the globe. Prior to joining Quantinuum, he served as the General Manager, Compute and Networking Business Unit at Micron Technology, and spent 25 years at Intel Corporation, leading the Enterprise and Government Group, Technical Computing Group, Supercomputer Architecture and Planning, and Systems Technology Research. Before joining Intel in 1995, Dr. Hazra was with the Lockheed Corporation based at NASA’s Langley Research Center. Dr. Hazra holds a Ph.D. and an M.S. in Computer Science from the College of William and Mary, and a B.S. in Computer Science from Jadavpur University in Kolkata, India. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Nitesh Sharan Chief Financial Officer Nitesh Sharan Chief Financial Officer Mr. Sharan has over 25 years of experience in corporate financial leadership roles across technology, consumer and industrial sectors, spanning from early to late stage companies. Most recently, he was CFO at SoundHound AI, a pioneer in voice and conversational artificial intelligence, where he helped the company go public and scale its business nearly ten-fold during his five-year tenure. Prior to that, Mr. Sharan was a finance executive at Nike, holding roles as CFO of Global Operations, Treasurer and VP of Corporate Finance and Investor Relations. Prior to Nike, he spent fifteen years at Hewlett-Packard in various financial leadership roles and earlier in his career, he was a consultant with Accenture. Mr. Sharan holds a bachelor's degree from Case Western Reserve University, an MBA from the Kellogg School at Northwestern University and is a CFA charterholder. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Larry Stack Chief Commercial Officer Larry Stack Chief Commercial Officer Mr. Stack brings more than 20 years of experience leading global sales and go-to-market organizations across enterprise technology. Most recently, he served as Chief Revenue Officer at Procore Technologies and previously spent six years at Red Hat as Executive Vice President of Global Sales and Services. He has also held senior leadership roles at DXC Technology, Hewlett-Packard Enterprise, Accenture, and Fujitsu, where he led sales teams, expanded enterprise customer relationships, and drove international growth. Earlier in his career, Mr. Stack served in the United States Air Force, the White House Situation Room, and the United Nations. Mr. Stack holds a B.S. in Behavioral Sciences from the University of Maryland. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Kevin Dehoff Chief Strategy Officer and General Manager of Quantinuum Consulting Services Kevin Dehoff Chief Strategy Officer and General Manager of Quantinuum Consulting Services Mr. Dehoff brings more than three decades of experience in strategy, business leadership, and consulting advisory services. Most recently, he served as Chief Strategy Officer (CSO) at Honeywell, where he was responsible for developing and executing portfolio and growth strategies. Previously, as President & CEO of Honeywell Connected Enterprise, he led the company’s software business and oversaw the development of the Forge IoT platform. Mr. Dehoff also served as President of Honeywell Productivity Solutions & Services, a global leader in scanning and mobility solutions. Prior to joining Honeywell, he spent over 20 years in strategy consulting as a Senior Partner at Booz Allen Hamilton and McKinsey & Company, advising technology, industrial, and aerospace & defense clients worldwide. Mr. Dehoff earned his MBA from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania and holds both an MS in Systems Engineering and a BS in Engineering from Lehigh University. ‍ Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Robin Schulman Chief Legal Officer Robin Schulman Chief Legal Officer Ms. Schulman joins Quantinuum with more than two decades of legal and executive leadership experience guiding high-growth technology companies through periods of rapid expansion, strategic transformation, and public company evolution, with a track record of translating strategy into execution and building the foundations for sustainable growth. Most recently, Ms. Schulman served as Chief Legal Officer and Head of Corporate Affairs at GitLab, where she spent nearly seven years leading the company's global legal, compliance, policy, competition, intellectual property, corporate development, sustainability and privacy strategy. Prior to that, she was the Chief Legal Officer at Couchbase and New Relic and held senior leadership positions at Adobe Inc., helping to guide those organizations through periods of rapid, sustainable growth, strategic, durable transformation, and successful public offerings. Ms. Schulman holds a Doctor of Law (JD) from Rutgers Law School, and a BFA in Dramatic Writing and Film from New York University, Tisch School of the Arts. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Rory O’Byrne Chief People Officer Rory O’Byrne Chief People Officer Mr. O'Byrne joined Quantinuum in May 2026 as Chief People Officer. Mr. O'Byrne brings more than 30 years of global human resources experience with leading public and private equity-backed companies in the technology, energy, industrial, and services sectors. Before joining Quantinuum, he served as Chief People Officer for Advanced Energy, a global leader in precision power technology, where he drove the company’s people strategy and integration. Prior to this, he held global and international human resources leadership roles with MRC Global, McDermott International, Hess Corporation, and BHP. Mr. O'Byrne holds a bachelor’s degree in industrial relations and human resources management from the University of Western Australia in Perth, Western Australia. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Lawrence Schwartz Chief Marketing Officer Lawrence Schwartz Chief Marketing Officer Mr. Schwartz brings more than 20 years of experience leading global business to business marketing across enterprise software and industrial technology. Most recently, as CMO at AspenTech, he built the company’s Industrial AI positioning, scaled revenue, integrated multiple acquisitions, and played a key role in AspenTech’s sale to Emerson. He has also driven pipeline acceleration and market adoption at SoftwareONE, Attunity (acquired by Qlik), EMC (acquired by Dell) and multiple startups. Mr. Schwartz earned his MBA from Harvard Business School and holds Bachelor of Science and Master of Science degrees in Engineering from MIT, where he is currently a member of the Venture Mentoring Service. Earlier in his career, he built satellites for Hughes/Boeing and served on a NASA Cassini mission review panel. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Jenni Strabley Vice President and General Manager of Compute Platforms Group Dr. Jenni Strabley Vice President and General Manager of Compute Platforms Group Dr. Strabley is responsible for the profit and loss (P&L) and overall general management and product delivery of our compute products which include InQuanto, Quantum Systems (both cloud and HaaS) and Quantinuum Nexus. Dr. Strabley brings 14 years of prior experience in the aerospace industry, with roles in offering management, product line management, operations, project management, and new product and technology development. She has 19 awarded patents and holds a doctorate degree in atomic physics. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Duncan Jones General Manager, Applications Group Duncan Jones General Manager, Applications Group Mr. Jones brings almost 20 years of experience in technology leadership, with a focus on emerging technologies, deep tech, and product development. He has been with the company since its Cambridge Quantum days in 2020. Previously, Mr. Jones held senior leadership roles at Arm, Thales, and Worldpay across research, innovation, and product management. In these roles, he led technical and product teams, translated emerging technologies into commercial opportunities, and worked closely with customers to develop and bring new products and capabilities to market. Mr. Jones holds a bachelor’s degree in computer science from the University of Cambridge. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Prof. Harry Buhrman Chief Scientist for Algorithms and Innovation Prof. Harry Buhrman Chief Scientist for Algorithms and Innovation Prof. Buhrman has had an eminent career in academia, as distinguished research Professor of algorithms, complexity theory and quantum computing at the University of Amsterdam and leader of the algorithms & complexity group at CWI, the national research institute for mathematics and computer science. Prof. Buhrman was the founding director of QuSoft, the Dutch research centre for quantum software, launched in 2015. His research interests cover quantum computing, information, and cryptography, computational complexity theory, and computational biology. Prof. Buhrman has been an active researcher, advancing our understanding of complexity theory and quantum computing and quantum communication for over 25 years, when he founded and headed the quantum computing group at CWI. Prof. Buhrman has been an integral part of the development of the EU’s quantum computing roadmap and is recognised as a global leader in quantum computing. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more scientific leadership Alex Chernoguzov Senior Fellow Alex Chernoguzov Senior Fellow Alex is a Fellow and a software architect responsible for all levels of quantum computer software stack from control system directly manipulating qubits to cloud software providing end users remote access to quantum processors. Alex's professional career starts at Honeywell in 1995. Prior to transitioning to Quantinuum predecessor, Honeywell Quantum Solutions, he was involved in developing industrial control systems, wireless sensor networks, automotive software, and cyber security research leading to many successful commercial products. Alex received his undergraduate degree in Physics from Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology and MSEE degree from University of Delaware. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Stephen Clark Head of AI Dr. Stephen Clark Head of AI Stephen Clark is Head of Artificial Intelligence at Quantinuum. Previously, he spent 14 years as a Member of Faculty at the Departments of Computer Science of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and has also been an Honorary Professor at Queen Mary University of London. From 2016 to 2021, he was a Research Scientist at Google DeepMind in London. Stephen holds an undergraduate degree in Philosophy from the University of Cambridge and a Ph.D. in Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence from the University of Sussex. Much of his research has been in the areas of Computational Linguistics and Natural Language Processing, and he now leads a team of researchers at Quantinuum working at the intersection of AI and quantum computing. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Florian Curchod Head of Quantum Cryptography Dr. Florian Curchod Head of Quantum Cryptography Florian co-leads the quantum cryptography group, focussing both on the security of quantum computations and on developing security applications that have a quantum advantage. The group has developed the first products and practical applications using quantum computers. Florian obtained his BSc and MSc from the University of Geneva and his PhD from The Institute of Photonic Sciences (ICFO). Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Henrik Dreyer Managing Director and Scientific Lead, Munich Dr. Henrik Dreyer Managing Director and Scientific Lead, Munich Henrik is a theoretical physicist using classical and quantum computers to study strongly correlated quantum many-body systems. Henrik’s team develops near-term quantum algorithms for the simulation of materials and tools to accelerate fundamental physics research. He worked on the interface between quantum information and condensed matter physics during his Ph.D. at the Max-Planck Institute of Quantum Optics and at Oxford University. He holds degrees in Physics and Mathematics from ETH Zürich and Cambridge University. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Ross Duncan Senior Fellow Dr. Ross Duncan Senior Fellow Ross Duncan leads quantum software and holds honorary positions at the University of Strathclyde and University College London. He obtained his Doctorate from Oxford University in 2006 for his thesis “Types for Quantum Computation”. Since then, he has held positions as an EPSRC Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the University of Oxford, Chargé de Recherche at the Université Libre de Bruxelles, and Lecturer of Computer Science at the University of Strathclyde. His research focuses on the foundations of quantum computing and on the use of category theory and diagrammatic calculi to better understand the structure of quantum states and programs; he is the co-inventor (with Professor Bob Coecke) of the ZX-calculus and has applied this to reason about quantum circuits, measurement-based quantum computation, and quantum error correcting codes. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Dave Hayes Director of Computational Design and Theory Dr. Dave Hayes Director of Computational Design and Theory Dave Hayes is the Director of Computational Design and Theory. He has a mixed background including graduate work in both theory in quantum control and experiments with trapped-ions. At Quantinuum, Dave has focused on architecture designs, coherent control optimization and error budgets, and management of our AMO, QCVV, QEC, and near-term Algorithms teams. Dave is currently living in Broomfield, CO. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Chris Langer Fellow Dr. Chris Langer Fellow Chris serves as an advisor to the CEO and COO. Chris is a key inventor and architect for the Quantinuum hardware. Prior to joining Quantinuum (formerly Honeywell) in 2016, Chris worked 10 years at Lockheed Martin on various projects within the Space Systems Company and the Aeronautics Company. Chris received his Ph.D. in physics from the University of Colorado for work on ion trap quantum computing under Nobel Laureate David Wineland. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Patty Lee Chief Scientist for Hardware Technology Development Dr. Patty Lee Chief Scientist for Hardware Technology Development Patty leads Quantinuum’s efforts to develop next-generation technologies for scaling trapped-ion quantum computers. She is widely recognized for her foundational work on phase control of geometric phase gates in trapped ion systems. Her career spans leadership roles in government and industry, including research positions at NIST, U.S. Army Research Laboratory, and Lockheed Martin. Patty received the Quantum World Congress Industry Pioneer Award and was named to UNESCO’s Quantum 100 in recognition of her contributions to the global quantum ecosystem. She helps shape the future of the field through service on international advisory boards. Patty holds a Ph.D. from University of Michigan and a B.S. from Caltech. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Brian Neyenhuis Director of Cloud Operations Dr. Brian Neyenhuis Director of Cloud Operations Brian leads a team of scientists, engineers and technicians who upgrade and operate Quantinuum’s commercial quantum computers. Dr Neyenhuis did his postdoctoral research at the University of Maryland where he focused on quantum simulation and the development of new quantum technologies. Brian earned a B.S. in Physics at Brigham Young University and a Ph.D. in Physics from the University of Colorado. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. David Muñoz Ramo Head of Quantum Chemistry Dr. David Muñoz Ramo Head of Quantum Chemistry David is the Head of Quantum Chemistry for Quantinuum. David earned his Master’s and Ph.D. in Computational Chemistry from the University of Barcelona in 2004, and has worked in computational science for 15 years. He was a research associate at the University College London, then at the University of Cambridge, before joining Quantinuum. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Matthias Rosenkranz Principal R&D Manager, Quantum Algorithms Dr. Matthias Rosenkranz Principal R&D Manager, Quantum Algorithms Matthias leads a team of scientists developing quantum algorithms and applications for Quantinuum’s hardware, with a focus on computational problems such as topological data analysis, differential equations, and optimization. Before joining Quantinuum, he worked as a research fellow at the National University of Singapore and at a consulting firm, where he helped build a quantum technology unit. He holds a PhD in atomic physics and an MSc in mathematical finance from the University of Oxford, and an MSc in physics from the Technical University of Darmstadt. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Steve Sanders Senior Director Product Engineering Design and Producibility Dr. Steve Sanders Senior Director Product Engineering Design and Producibility Steve has been with Quantinuum since early 2018, leading a quantum computing research and development effort across a broad swath of engineering and physics disciplines. Prior to joining Quantinuum's predecessor organization, Honeywell Quantum Solutions, Steve worked at Honeywell since 1998 as a research scientist in optical sensors, where he led groups designing fiber-optic gyroscopes, inertial measurement units, and celestial navigation systems for high-performance guidance and navigation. Products of his design are currently operating at sea and in space. Steve holds a B.S. in engineering physics from U.C. Berkeley and a Ph.D. in plasma physics from Caltech. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Prof. Harry Buhrman Chief Scientist for Algorithms and Innovation Prof. Harry Buhrman Chief Scientist for Algorithms and Innovation Prof. Buhrman has had an eminent career in academia, as distinguished research Professor of algorithms, complexity theory and quantum computing at the University of Amsterdam and leader of the algorithms & complexity group at CWI, the national research institute for mathematics and computer science. Prof. Buhrman was the founding director of QuSoft, the Dutch research centre for quantum software, launched in 2015. His research interests cover quantum computing, information, and cryptography, computational complexity theory, and computational biology. Prof. Buhrman has been an active researcher, advancing our understanding of complexity theory and quantum computing and quantum communication for over 25 years, when he founded and headed the quantum computing group at CWI. Prof. Buhrman has been an integral part of the development of the EU’s quantum computing roadmap and is recognised as a global leader in quantum computing. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Elvira Shishenina Senior Director of Strategic Initiatives Dr. Elvira Shishenina Senior Director of Strategic Initiatives Elvira Shishenina is the Senior Director of Strategic Initiatives at Quantinuum, where she leads global efforts to explore industrial pathways to quantum advantage. She brings a wealth of experience from her pioneering work at BMW Group, where she spearheaded quantum computing research for material simulation, and at TotalEnergies, where she contributed to innovations for sustainable energy. Elvira holds a PhD in Mathematics from French Inria and is an alumna of the prestigious École Polytechnique in Paris. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Russell Stutz Senior Director Product Technologies Dr. Russell Stutz Senior Director Product Technologies Russell is responsible for the design and build of Quantinuum’s trapped-ion commercial quantum computers. He received his Bachelor of Science in Physics from the University of Kansas, taking a commission in the US Air Force through the ROTC program upon graduation. As an Air Force officer, he worked on laser research at the Air Force Research Lab, Directed Energy Directorate at Kirtland AFB, NM. Dr Stutz received his Ph.D. from the University of Colorado-Boulder in atomic, molecular, and optical physics in 2010. Eric Cornell, his research advisor at CU, is a Nobel Laureate in Physics. After receiving his Ph.D., Dr Stutz has worked industrial research and development at AOSense, a small company in California developing quantum sensors, as well as Lockheed Martin in Colorado. He has been with Quantinuum since 2016 and was one of the first employees at the Broomfield, CO site. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Dr. Grahame Vittorini Technical Director for On-Premises Projects and Operations Dr. Grahame Vittorini Technical Director for On-Premises Projects and Operations Grahame leads the team responsible for localizing, deploying, and operating quantum computers at customer sites, working closely with the customer to prepare facilities, manage installation, and maintain high reliability operations. He has performed research and development as well as commercial quantum computer build and launch while at Quantinuum and predecessors. Throughout his career, he has worked in trapped ion quantum computing and contributed to efforts at the Georgia Institute of Technology, Georgia Tech Research Institute, University of Maryland, and Honeywell. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more board of directors Kenneth “Ken” Denman Independent Board Chair Kenneth “Ken” Denman Independent Board Chair Mr. Denman is a Managing Director at Sway Ventures. He is an experienced CEO from the software technology and telecommunications industries, having previously served in that capacity for Emotient (Sold to Apple), Openwave Systems and iPass, Inc., where he led a successful IPO. He previously held SVP and COO roles with MediaOne. Mr. Denman currently serves as a director on the boards of Costco Wholesale Corporation, and Motorola Solutions, where he is Lead Independent Director. Previously he served on the board of VMware until its acquisition by Broadcom. Mr. Denman holds an M.B.A. from the University of Washington and a bachelor’s degree in accounting from Central Washington University. ‍ *Independent Director *Chair of the Board *Member of the Transaction Committee Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Rajeeb “Raj” Hazra President, Chief Executive Officer & Director Rajeeb “Raj” Hazra President, Chief Executive Officer & Director Dr. Hazra is the President and CEO of Quantinuum and has more than three decades of experience in supercomputing, quantum, and technical roles across the globe. Prior to joining Quantinuum, he served as the General Manager, Compute and Networking Business Unit at Micron Technology, and spent 25 years at Intel Corporation, leading the Enterprise and Government Group, Technical Computing Group, Supercomputer Architecture and Planning, and Systems Technology Research. Before joining Intel in 1995, Dr. Hazra was with the Lockheed Corporation based at NASA’s Langley Research Center. Dr. Hazra holds a Ph.D. and an M.S. in Computer Science from the College of William and Mary, and a B.S. in Computer Science from Jadavpur University in Kolkata, India. Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Harold “Hal” Barron Independent Director Harold “Hal” Barron Independent Director Dr. Barron currently serves as CEO, Founder and Board Co-Chair of Altos Labs, a company focused on developing medicines to reverse age-related diseases by leveraging cell rejuvenation. He previously served as Chief Scientific Officer, and President of R&D at GSK, where he remains on the Board of Directors as a non-executive director. Prior to joining GSK, Dr. Barron was President, R&D at Calico Life Sciences, an Alphabet-funded company focused on aging, and before that, was Executive Vice President and Chief Medical Officer at both Roche and Genentech. Dr. Barron holds a B.S. in physics from Washington University School of Engineering in St. Louis and an M.D. from Yale University School of Medicine. He completed his training in Internal Medicine and Cardiology at the University of California, San Francisco, where he continues to serve as an adjunct professor. ‍ *Independent Director *Member of the Talent and Compensation Committee *Chair of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Manish Bhatia Independent Director Manish Bhatia Independent Director Mr. Bhatia currently serves as EVP of Global Operations at Micron Technology, which he joined in 2017 and where he is responsible for the company’s end-to-end operations, delivering industry-leading technology and products at scale. Prior to Micron, Mr. Bhatia held several executive roles at Western Digital Corporation, SanDisk Corporation, Matrix Semiconductor, and in consulting at McKinsey & Company. Mr. Bhatia earned bachelor’s and master’s degrees in mechanical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a master’s degree in business administration from MIT’s Sloan School of Management, which he attended as a Leaders for Manufacturing fellow. ‍ *Independent Director *Member of the Audit Committee *Member of the Talent and Compensation Committee Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Eric Branderiz Independent Director Eric Branderiz Independent Director Mr. Branderiz most recently served as EVP and CFO of Enphase Energy, a renewable energy and semiconductor technology company. He previously held roles as Chief Accounting Officer and Corporate Controller of Tesla, Inc., and SVP, Corporate Controller and Chief Accounting Officer at SunPower. Before joining SunPower, Mr. Branderiz served in various senior roles at Knowledge Learning Corporation, Spansion, Inc., Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., Ernst & Young LLP (U.S. and Canada), Alberta Registry (Canada), and the Alberta Securities & Exchange Commission (Canada). He currently serves on the board of directors of Fortive, Cognizant Technology Solutions, and Symbotic, as well as two private company boards. Mr. Branderiz is a Certified Public Accountant in California and holds a bachelor’s degree in business commerce from the University of Alberta. ‍ *Independent Director *Chair of the Audit Committee *Member of the Transaction Committee Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Paul Daugherty Independent Director Paul Daugherty Independent Director Mr. Daugherty is a technology executive, investor and author, currently serving as AI Advisory Chair for TPG. He previously served as CEO of Accenture’s Technology group, as well as CTO. Mr. Daugherty serves on the boards of Evolver.ai, Databook, American Society for AI, and the Computer History Museum, and on the advisory council for the Stanford Institute for Human Centered AI. His many publications include the acclaimed "Human + Machine: Reimagining Work in the Age of AI" (HBR Press). Mr. Daugherty holds a bachelor’s degree in computer engineering from University of Michigan. ‍ *Independent Director *Member of the Audit Committee *Member of the Talent and Compensation Committee Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Joseph “Joe” Jimenez Independent Director Joseph “Joe” Jimenez Independent Director Mr. Jimenez is Co-Founder and Managing Director at Aditum Bio, a biotech venture firm. From 2010 to 2018, he held the position of Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of Novartis, one of the world’s leading pharmaceutical companies. Under his leadership, Novartis developed one of the largest pipelines of self-originated drugs in the industry, driven by a strong commitment to R&D. Mr. Jimenez is currently a member of the Board of Directors of General Motors Company and the Procter & Gamble Company, where he is Lead Independent Director. Mr. Jimenez holds an M.B.A. from University of California, Berkeley and a bachelor’s degree in economics from Stanford University. ‍ *Independent Director *Member of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee *Chair of the Talent and Compensation Committee Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Vimal Kapur Director Vimal Kapur Director Mr. Kapur currently serves as Chairman and CEO of Honeywell, a global integrated operating company that helps customers solve the world's most complex challenges across the industrial, process and building sectors. Prior to becoming CEO, Vimal was Honeywell’s President and COO, and previously served as President and CEO of two strategic business units focused on the energy transition and industrial and building automation. He started his career at a Honeywell joint venture and eventually became the Managing Director of Honeywell Automation India Ltd. Mr. Kapur holds a bachelor’s degree in electronics engineering from Thapar Institute of Engineering. ‍ *Chair of the Transaction Committee Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Prineha Narang Independent Director Prineha Narang Independent Director Dr. Narang is a Professor in Physical Sciences, and in Electrical and Computer Engineering at UCLA, leading an interdisciplinary group spanning physics, chemistry, and engineering. Prior to moving to UCLA, she was an Assistant Professor of Computational Materials Science at Harvard University. Before joining the Harvard faculty in 2017, Dr. Narang was a Fellow at Harvard University, and worked as a research scholar in condensed matter theory in the Department of Physics at MIT. She was appointed a U.S. Science Envoy by the Secretary of State in 2023 and was reappointed to the role in 2024 to advance American quantum science, technology, and innovation internationally. Dr. Narang is an elected Fellow of the American Physical Society. She serves on the Board of Trustees of the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) and as a director on the board of Infinite Eagle Acquisition Corp.She received an M.S. and Ph.D. in Applied Physics from the California Institute of Technology (Caltech). ‍ *Independent Director *Member of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more Michal “Mike” Stepniak Director Michal “Mike” Stepniak Director Mr. Stepniak is currently SVP and CFO for Honeywell, which he joined in 2020. He previously held roles with the company as VP of Corporate Finance, VP and CFO for Honeywell Building Technologies and then as VP and CFO for Honeywell Aerospace Technologies. Prior to joining Honeywell, Mr. Stepniak spent 18 years with General Electric Co., progressing through various global finance leadership roles. He most recently served as CFO of the Oilfield Equipment division at Baker Hughes International, a GE company. He started his career in the Financial Management and Corporate Audit programs at GE. Mr. Stepniak holds an M.B.A. from the University of Memphis and a bachelor’s degree in business administration from Edinboro University of Pennsylvania. ‍ Mike Stepniak’s participation in the Audit Committee, Talent and Compensation Committee, and Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee is subject to Nasdaq’s phase-in rules. *Member of the Audit Committee *Member of the Talent and Compensation Committee *Member of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee *Member of the Transaction Committee Linkedin X (Twitter) Google Scholar Read more An expansive global reach, right out of the quantum gate Broomfield, Colorado, USA 303 S Technology Court Broomfield, CO 80021 +1 (855) 888-7686 Cambridge, United Kingdom Terrington House 13-15 Hills Road Cambridge CB2 1NL Brooklyn Park, Minnesota, USA 8799 Brooklyn Boulevard Brooklyn Park, MN 55428 London, United Kingdom Partnership House, Carlisle Place London SW1P 1BX Washington, DC, USA 1300 N. 17th Street, Suite 530 Arlington, VA 22209 Oxford, United Kingdom 17 Beaumont Street Oxford OX1 2NA Munich, Germany Leopoldstraße 180 80804 München Germany Albuquerque, NM, USA 5501 Wilshire Ave. NE Suite F Albuquerque, NM 87113 Singapore 1 Fusionopolis Way, #07-15 Connexis North Singapore 138632 Tokyo, Japan Otemachi Financial City Grand Cube 3F Global Business Hub Tokyo 1-9-2 Otemachi, Chiyoda-ku Tokyo 100-0004 Company About Us Careers Investors Leadership Newsroom Publications Contact Us Quantinuum Japan Products & Solutions Quantinuum Systems Helios Quantum Origin InQuanto Nexus Developer Tools Get Started Hardware Access Cloud Access Documentation Stay Connected Q-Net Startup Partner Program Legal Privacy Statement Cookie Notice Website Terms & Conditions Commercial Terms & Conditions Trademark Usage Guidelines License Agreements Cookie Preferences Integrity & Compliance © 2026 Quantinuum. All rights reserved. 