 Home - Ramaco Resources Met Coal Rare Earths Overview FAQs About Leadership Carbon Research Foundation Media Coverage News Releases Careers Contact Us Whistleblower Reports Investors Select Page Building the Future Ramaco is a leading operator and developer of high-quality, low-cost metallurgical coal mines for the steelmaking industry, and is advancing an exploration-phase rare earth elements, critical minerals, and thermal coal project in Wyoming. Ramaco produces the materials that keep America strong, secure, and moving forward. Building the Future Ramaco is a leading operator and developer of high-quality, low-cost metallurgical coal mines for the steelmaking industry, and is developing an exploration-phase rare earth elements, critical minerals, and thermal coal project in Wyoming. Ramaco produces the materials that keep America strong, secure, and moving forward. Recent News BROOK MINE UPDATES SHAREHOLDER LETTER (07.29.26) Initial Assessment Report (07.29.26) Frequently asked questions Shareholder Letter (07.29.26) Initial Assessment Report (07.29.26) Frequently Asked Questions Critical Minerals & Rare earth elements Ramaco is advancing an exploration-phase rare earth elements, critical minerals, and thermal coal project in Wyoming. These rare earth elements and critical minerals include heavy magnetic rare earth elements that are crucial for national defense and economic prosperity. If successfully developed, the Brook Mine has the potential to become a key domestic source of the critical materials needed for advanced military technology, batteries, medical devices, semiconductors, and much more. The project is initially focused on exploration and project advancement activities related to high-purity critical minerals such as gallium, alumina, and quartz, primarily targeting the semiconductor industry, as well as scandium oxide and mixed rare earth carbonate (MREC) for sale to third-party processors. Our estimates of rare earth and critical minerals at the Brook Mine are reported as in-place inferred mineral resources. Inferred mineral resources are not mineral reserves and do not have demonstrated economic viability. Learn More Rare Earth Elements & Critical Minerals Ramaco is advancing an exploration-phase rare earth elements, critical minerals, and thermal coal project in Wyoming. These rare earth elements and critical minerals include heavy magnetic rare earth elements that are crucial for national defense and economic prosperity. If successfully developed, the Brook Mine has the potential to become a key domestic source of the critical materials needed for advanced military technology, batteries, medical devices, semiconductors, and much more. The project is initially focused on exploration and project advancement activities related to high-purity critical minerals such as gallium, alumina, and quartz, primarily targeting the semiconductor industry, as well as scandium oxide and mixed rare earth carbonate (MREC) for sale to third-party processors. Our estimates of rare earth and critical minerals at the Brook Mine are reported as in-place inferred mineral resources. Inferred mineral resources are not mineral reserves and do not have demonstrated economic viability. learn more Met coal operations Ramaco operates four mine complexes and processing facilities in West Virginia and Virginia. We have achieved production of almost 4 million tons of metallurgical coal annually and are a reliable provider of this critical feedstock to both domestic manufacturers and customers worldwide. Ramaco is regularly recognized with national safety and environmental awards and employs approximately 900 people. learn more Carbon innovation We are partnered with the Department of Energy’s national laboratories and others to conduct cutting-edge carbon materials and products research. This is primarily focused on replacing petroleum with coal as a feedstock for manufacturing advanced carbon products and materials, such as carbon fiber, graphene, and synthetic graphite. Ramaco operates a carbon research facility in Wyoming. learn more Met Coal Operations Ramaco operates four mine complexes and processing facilities in West Virginia and Virginia. We have achieved production of almost 4 million tons of metallurgical coal annually and are a reliable provider of this critical feedstock to both domestic manufacturers and customers worldwide. Ramaco is regularly recognized with national safety and environmental awards and employs approximately 900 people. learn more Carbon Innovation We are partnered with the Department of Energy’s national laboratories and others to conduct cutting-edge carbon materials and products research. This is primarily focused on replacing petroleum with coal as a feedstock for manufacturing advanced carbon products and materials, such as carbon fiber, graphene, and synthetic graphite. Ramaco operates a carbon research facility in Wyoming. learn more Investors Ramaco has one of the most conservative balance sheets in the industry and is among the fastest-growing public coal companies. Our asset retirement obligations — tracking land restoration/reclamation obligations and other legacy liabilities — are 93% below the average of our peers. We are rapidly growing and targeting our production levels to exceed six million tons over the next several years. We serve both domestic and international markets with low-cost, efficient operations and high-quality resources. In addition to our primary Class A stock (METC), our Class B tracking stock (METCB) provides an income-yielding asset mix of coal royalties, logistical tolling fees, intellectual property, and possible revenue from our exploratory rare earth elements, critical minerals, and thermal coal development project in Wyoming. investor center Ramaco Resources Inc. 250 West Main St. Suite 1900 Lexington, KY 40507 Investor Contact Jeremy Sussman, Chief Financial Officer 859-244-7455 info@ramacometc.com Ramaco Resources Inc. 250 West Main St. Suite 1900 Lexington, KY 40507 Investor Contact Jeremy Sussman, Chief Financial Officer 859-244-7455 info@ramacometc.com © Copyright 2026 Ramaco Resources, Inc. Privacy Policy 