 Quantum Computing | Rigetti Computing Quantum. Quick. | Our 9-qubit QPU is ready to ship today Order Yours Quantum. Quick. | Our 9-qubit QPU is ready to ship today Order Yours Rigetti Why What Novera About Careers Investors Search Get Quantum Home + Home Numbers Applications Thinking Why + Why Use Cases Applications What + What Stack History Research Novera About + About Leadership News Contact Careers + Careers Testimonials Who We Are Benefits Job listings Get Quantum Investors 1 2 3 4 5 Welcome to the next generation of computing This is where you find technology as pioneering as your own work. The quantum hardware at the core of our systems is cooled by a dilution refrigerator. Take a look inside and click on the numbered points to see how it all comes together. Learn More The Machine 1 Dilution Refrigerator When the computer is operational, five casings (like the white one shown at the top of the image) envelop the machine. These cans nest inside each other and act as thermal and radiation shields, keeping everything super cold and vacuum-sealed. The Machine 2 Signal Chain These cables deliver and condition microwave signals to and from the chip to drive qubit operations and return the measured results. The Machine 3 Temperature Stages These gold-plated copper plates separate cooling zones. At the bottom, they plunge to one-hundredth of a Kelvin—hundreds of times as cold as outer space. The Machine 4 Mixing Chamber At the lowest, coldest plate sits the most critical hardware, including amplifiers, additional cables, filters, and the mounts that hold the quantum processing unit. The Machine 5 QPU The QPU (quantum processing unit) is a superconducting quantum integrated circuit that powers the quantum computer, inside a metal package that thermalizes it and shields it from the environment. Think quantum Quantum. Quick. | Our 9-qubit QPU is ready to ship today Order Yours Welcome to the next generation of computing This is where you find technology as pioneering as your own work. The quantum hardware at the core of our systems is cooled by a dilution refrigerator. Take a look inside and click on the numbered points to see how it all comes together. Learn More The Machine 1 Dilution Refrigerator When the computer is operational, five casings (like the white one shown at the top of the image) envelop the machine. These cans nest inside each other and act as thermal and radiation shields, keeping everything super cold and vacuum-sealed. 2 Signal Chain These cables deliver and condition microwave signals to and from the chip to drive qubit operations and return the measured results. 3 Temperature Stages These gold-plated copper plates separate cooling zones. At the bottom, they plunge to one-hundredth of a Kelvin—hundreds of times as cold as outer space. 4 Mixing Chamber At the lowest, coldest plate sits the most critical hardware, including amplifiers, additional cables, filters, and the mounts that hold the quantum processing unit. 5 QPU The QPU (quantum processing unit) is a superconducting quantum integrated circuit that powers the quantum computer, inside a metal package that thermalizes it and shields it from the environment. Quantum. Quick. The Novera QPU, our 9-qubit QPU, gives you unprecedented access to quantum technology and empowers you to take your research to the next level. Best of all, it’s ready to ship today. See What's Possible Rigetti Right Now Cepheus-1-108Q Median Time Duration (µs) Median Fidelity (per op.) Deployed 04.07.26 T1 Lifetime 26 Single-qubit gates 99.85% Qubits 107 T2 Lifetime 11 Two-qubit gates (CZ) 98.75% Cepheus-1-108Q Deployed 04.07.26 Qubits 107 Median Time Duration T1 Lifetime 26 T2 Lifetime 11 Median Fidelity (per op.) Single-qubit Gates 99.85% Two-qubit gates (CZ) 98.75% Running on Rigetti Technology Partners Distribution Channels The latest in quantum thinking Algorithms & Applications 28.08.26 Quantum preconditioning for constrained optimization problems We study the effect of quantum preconditioning on constrained combinatorial optimization problems, focusing on balanced graph bi-partitioning. The proposed approach uses two-point correlations between decision variables derived from the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) to construct a modified objective function that is subsequently provided to mixed-integer programming (MIP) solvers. The results support a hybrid optimization framework in which quantum algorithms provide problem-specific information to guide classical exact MIP solvers. Learn More Systems R&D 27.08.26 Scaling Alternating-Bias-Assisted Annealing for precision transmon frequency targeting on superconducting quantum processors Here, we characterize ABAA tuning performance within a 150-mm wafer process flow and extend this technique to simultaneous, multi-channel tuning, demonstrating that a wafer-scale JJ resistance tuning precision of σ=0.50±0.05% alongside a component-level yield of ≥98.8% can be achieved. These results confirm the efficacy and scalability of ABAA for high-precision Hamiltonian targeting, a critical enabler for modular superconducting quantum processor technology. Learn More Systems R&D 07.07.26 Localized thermometry via Dayem bridges integrated on superconducting qubit chips Here we demonstrate a complementary on-chip thermometry method based on superconducting Dayem bridges that are integrated on the same chip as transmon qubits. By extracting the critical current of the Dayem bridge from I-V measurements, we obtain a local, quantitative measure of the chip temperature without the need for microwave calibration or qubit-specific control sequences. Learn More Systems R&D 01.06.26 Demonstrating real-time and low-latency quantum error correction with superconducting qubits Quantum error correction will be essential for quantum computers to realize their full potential. As quantum computers advance towards demonstrating a universal fault-tolerant logical gate set, implementing scalable and low-latency real-time decoding will be crucial to avoid an exponential slowdown and maintain a fast logical clock rate. Here, we demonstrate low-latency feedback with a scalable FPGA decoder integrated into the control system of a superconducting quantum processor. Learn More View More Keep exploring Learn how quantum can help you solve problems and energize your innovation. Why Rigetti Computing Berkeley, CA & Fremont, CA QCS Sign in QCS Docs QCS Support Company News Research Applications Terms of Service Privacy Policy Cookie Notice US Applicant Privacy Policy Non-US Applicant Privacy Policy Investors EthicsPoint Contact Us Keep up with the cutting edge Subscribe to be notified about what’s new in the world of quantum and Rigetti Ankaa™, Aspen™, Cepheus™, Forest®, Lyra™, Novera™, pyQuil®, QCS®, QVM™, Quil™, Quil-T™, Quilc™ and Rigetti® are trademarks or registered trademarks of Rigetti & Co, LLC. © 2020–2026 Rigetti & Co, LLC. All rights reserved. 