 About Rigetti Computing | Rigetti Computing Rigetti Why What Novera About Careers Investors Search Get Quantum Home + Home Numbers Applications Thinking Why + Why Use Cases Applications What + What Stack History Research Novera About + About Leadership News Contact Careers + Careers Testimonials Who We Are Benefits Job listings Get Quantum Investors We're on a mission to build the world’s most powerful computers to help solve humanity’s most important and pressing problems. Our Approach Rigetti Computing is an integrated systems company. We build quantum computers and the superconducting quantum processors that power them. Through our Quantum Cloud Services (QCS) platform, our machines can be integrated into any public, private or hybrid cloud. Leadership Board of Directors Leadership Team View More Thomas J. Iannotti Chairman of the Board × Thomas J. Iannotti Chairman of the Board Mr. Iannotti has been Chairman of the Board of Directors since October 2023. Mr. Iannotti served as Senior Vice President and General Manager, Enterprise Services, for Hewlett-Packard Company, a technology solutions provider to consumers, businesses and institutions globally, from 2009 until his retirement in 2011. Prior to that role, Mr. Iannotti held various executive positions at Hewlett-Packard, including Senior Vice President and Managing Director, Enterprise Business Group, Americas. Mr. Iannotti also worked at Digital Equipment Corporation, a vendor of computer systems and software, and at Compaq Computer Corporation, a supplier of personal computing systems, following its acquisition of Digital Equipment Corporation. Mr. Iannotti has served as Chairman of the Board of Applied Materials (NASDAQ: AMAT), a multi-billion publicly traded company that produces semiconductor fabrication equipment, since 2005, and previously served as Chairman of the Board of Atento S.A. View More Michael Clifton Director × Michael Clifton Director Mr. Clifton has served as a member of the Board of Directors since March 2022. Mr. Clifton currently serves as a Partner at Falfurrias Management Partners, where he helps lead Falfurrias Growth Partners, a technology-focused private equity fund, a position he has held since September 2022. He served as a director and Chief Financial Officer of Supernova Partners Acquisition Company III Ltd. from March 2021 until March 2023 and April 2023, respectively; as a director and Chief Financial Officer of Supernova Partners Acquisition Company II, Ltd. from October 2020 until March 2022; and Chief Financial Officer of Supernova Partners Acquisition Company, Inc. from September 2020 until March 2021. Prior to that he was a senior investment professional at The Carlyle Group from 2010 to September 2020 as a member of its flagship U.S. Buyout team where he helped lead Carlyle’s investing activities in the technology and business services sectors. During his tenure with Carlyle, he worked on transactions involving companies in multiple sectors, including semiconductors. He has served on more than a dozen public and private boards. Over his career, Mr. Clifton has been involved in several leveraged buyouts (including taking public companies private), growth investments, and carve-outs. Additionally, Mr. Clifton has substantial public market experience and has helped lead the public and follow-on offerings for several companies. Prior to joining Carlyle, Mr. Clifton worked at two middle market private equity firms, as well as in the M&A group of Bank of America Securities. He earned a Bachelor of Arts, cum laude, in classics from Davidson College, and an MBA with High Distinction from the Harvard Business School where he was a Baker Scholar. View More Alissa M. Fitzgerald Director × Alissa M. Fitzgerald Director Dr. Fitzgerald, NACD.DC has served as a member of the Board of Directors since March 2022 and previously served as a member of the Legacy Rigetti Board of Directors from April 2018 until the consummation of the Business Combination. She has also served as the Chief Executive Officer and Managing Member of A.M. Fitzgerald & Associates, LLC, a product development firm for micro electromechanical systems (MEMS) and silicon-based technologies since 2003. She had previously worked in engineering or management positions at several technology companies, including Orbital Sciences Corporation and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. She served as a member of the SEMI MEMS Standards Committee from 2015 to 2025, on the Board of Directors of Transducer Research Foundation from 2016 to 2024 and on the Board of Directors for the MEMS Industry Group (MIG) from 2008 to 2014. Dr. Fitzgerald received a Ph.D. in aeronautics and astronautics from Stanford University and an M.S. and B.S. in aeronautics and astronautics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. View More Dr. Subodh Kulkarni Director × Dr. Subodh Kulkarni Director Dr. Kulkarni has served as President and Chief Executive Officer at Rigetti since December 2022. Dr. Kulkarni is a seasoned public company CEO with thirty-plus years of experience in the semiconductor industry and a track record of success in scaling and commercializing cutting-edge technologies. Prior to joining Rigetti, Dr. Kulkarni was President, CEO, and member of the Board of CyberOptics Corporation, a developer and manufacturer of high precision sensors and inspection systems for the semiconductor and electronics industry. He held these roles from 2014 until CyberOptics was acquired by Nordson Corporation in November 2022. Prior to CyberOptics, Dr. Kulkarni was CEO of Prism Computational Sciences, a developer of software tools for scientific and commercial applications in the semiconductor industry. Earlier in his career, he held additional leadership positions, including Chief Technology Officer and Senior Vice President of OEM/Emerging business, global commercial business, R&D and manufacturing at Imation, a global scalable storage and data security company. Dr. Kulkarni began his career in research and management positions with 3M Corporation and IBM. He received his B.S. in chemical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai, and later obtained a M.S. and Ph.D. in chemical engineering from MIT. Dr. Kulkarni currently serves on the Board of KeyTronic Corporation, a publicly traded electronics manufacturing services company, as well as Chairman of the Board for Prism Computational Sciences. View More Dr. Subodh Kulkarni President and CEO × Dr. Subodh Kulkarni President and CEO Dr. Kulkarni has served as President and Chief Executive Officer at Rigetti since December 2022. Dr. Kulkarni is a seasoned public company CEO with thirty-plus years of experience in the semiconductor industry and a track record of success in scaling and commercializing cutting-edge technologies. Prior to joining Rigetti, Dr. Kulkarni was President, CEO, and member of the Board of CyberOptics Corporation, a developer and manufacturer of high precision sensors and inspection systems for the semiconductor and electronics industry. He held these roles from 2014 until CyberOptics was acquired by Nordson Corporation in November 2022. Prior to CyberOptics, Dr. Kulkarni was CEO of Prism Computational Sciences, a developer of software tools for scientific and commercial applications in the semiconductor industry. Earlier in his career, he held additional leadership positions, including Chief Technology Officer and Senior Vice President of OEM/Emerging business, global commercial business, R&D and manufacturing at Imation, a global scalable storage and data security company. Dr. Kulkarni began his career in research and management positions with 3M Corporation and IBM. He received his B.S. in chemical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai, and later obtained a M.S. and Ph.D. in chemical engineering from MIT. Dr. Kulkarni currently serves on the Board of KeyTronic Corporation, a publicly traded electronics manufacturing services company, as well as Chairman of the Board for Prism Computational Sciences. View More David Rivas COO × David Rivas COO Mr. Rivas has served as Chief Operating Officer of Rigetti since August 2026 where he oversees fabrication operations, systems delivery, software engineering, applications, sales & business development, government programs, supply chain, and facilities. Prior to this role, he served as Chief Technology Officer from February 2023, and Senior Vice President, Systems and Services from March 2019 where he led product management, and the engineering and operations of Rigetti’s Quantum Cloud Services (QCS) platform. Mr. Rivas has held executive roles at companies including Sun Microsystems, Nokia, Bolt Threads, and Stage 3 Systems. He holds a B.S. in electrical engineering and M.S. in electrical engineering, both from the University of California, San Diego. View More Jeffrey Bertelsen CFO × Jeffrey Bertelsen CFO Mr. Jeffrey Bertelsen was appointed Chief Financial Officer of Rigetti in February 2023. Mr. Bertelsen has more than twenty-five years of executive accomplishments in the hi-tech industry. Previously, Mr. Bertelsen served as Chief Financial Officer and Chief Operating Officer for CyberOptics Corporation from 2005 until 2022. Prior CyberOptics, Mr. Bertelsen was Vice President, Finance, Corporate Controller, Treasurer and Assistant Secretary of Computer Network Technology Corporation (“CNT”), a provider of storage networking equipment and solutions. During his 10 years at CNT, Mr. Bertelsen held various finance positions starting as a controller in 1995. Prior to CNT, he served as a CPA with KPMG, LLP. Mr. Bertelson has a B.S. in accounting and finance from the University of Minnesota. View More Andrew Bestwick CTO × Andrew Bestwick CTO Dr. Bestwick has served as Chief Technology Officer since August 2026, overseeing quantum processor research, chip fabrication development, and hardware engineering. Prior to this role, he served as Senior Vice President, Quantum Systems, where he led the development of Rigetti’s multi-chip architecture. Dr. Bestwick has worked in a variety of technical capacities at Rigetti beginning in August 2015, including fabrication, circuit design, cryo-RF hardware engineering, and system architecture. Dr. Bestwick began his career in management consulting at Bain & Company. He holds an A.B. in physics and mathematics from Harvard University and Ph.D. in physics from Stanford University. View More Jackie Kaweck SVP, Human Resources × Jackie Kaweck SVP, Human Resources Ms. Kaweck has served as Rigetti’s Senior Vice President, Human Resources since July 2021. Ms. Kaweck brings more than 20 years of experience in Human Resources and leadership development, working in the fields of technology, digital marketing, financial services, and consulting. Ms. Kaweck has a B.S. in finance from the University of Florida and an MBA from the University of Chicago. News 08.09.26 Rigetti signs definitive agreement for $100M with U.S. Government to accelerate R&D for superconducting quantum computing Rigetti announces that it has signed a definitive agreement with the U.S. Department of Commerce for an award of $100 million to accelerate R&D projects addressing key technical challenges in scaling and advancing superconducting quantum computers. GlobeNewswire Learn More 19.08.26 Rigetti Computing establishes dedicated systems delivery organization to scale customer deployments and advance quantum processor roadmap David Rivas appointed to newly created Chief Operating Officer role; Andrew Bestwick, Ph.D. appointed Chief Technology Officer GlobeNewswire Learn More 06.08.26 Rigetti Computing reports second quarter 2026 financial results Rigetti Computing, Inc. today announced financial results for the second quarter ended June 30, 2026 and provided an update on recent business and technology milestones. GlobeNewswire Learn More 30.07.26 A view of where progress on quantum stands, from the top of Rigetti Computing Interview with Subodh Kulkarni, the CEO of Rigetti Computing Inc., as part of our Bits, Bytes & Basis Points series. We asked Subodh for his views on where progress on quantum computing really stands, which sectors will see the most significant changes first, and the cryptographic harvest-now-decrypt-later threat. Moody's Ratings Learn More View More Locations Corporate HQ Berkeley, CA Rigetti Fab-1 Fremont, CA Global Office (UK) London Global Office (AUS) Sydney Contact us Have questions? Fill out the form below and we'll be in touch. Interested in working at Rigetti? View and apply for our current positions on the Careers page. For information on using Rigetti quantum systems please complete our Get Quantum form. Embrace your next grand challenge Work alongside passionate colleagues to develop a truly unique technology with lasting impact. Careers Rigetti Computing Berkeley, CA & Fremont, CA QCS Sign in QCS Docs QCS Support Company News Research Applications Terms of Service Privacy Policy Cookie Notice US Applicant Privacy Policy Non-US Applicant Privacy Policy Investors EthicsPoint Contact Us Keep up with the cutting edge Subscribe to be notified about what’s new in the world of quantum and Rigetti Ankaa™, Aspen™, Cepheus™, Forest®, Lyra™, Novera™, pyQuil®, QCS®, QVM™, Quil™, Quil-T™, Quilc™ and Rigetti® are trademarks or registered trademarks of Rigetti & Co, LLC. © 2020–2026 Rigetti & Co, LLC. All rights reserved. 