 Home | RTX Skip to main content RTX Businesses RTX Collins Aerospace Pratt & Whitney Raytheon RTX Internet Explorer is no longer supported by Microsoft. For best results, we recommend you select an alternate browser. Menu Who we are Who we are Overview Leadership Businesses Responsibility Corporate governance Global presence Company headquarters What we do What we do Overview Transformative technologies Advanced aviation Defense innovation News News Overview Media resources Careers Investors Suppliers Contacts Your browser does not support HTML5 video. Here is a link to the video Critical capability: How venture-backed innovation is making faster factories Learn more Latest News RTX's Raytheon awarded seven-year contract for Tomahawk cruise missiles Latest News RTX's Collins Aerospace EPACS power and thermal management system completes altitude testing Scroll to discover Who we are RTX connects our world through the power of flight and protects it with industry-leading defense technologies. This is where the world’s greatest minds take on the toughest challenges in aerospace and defense. Discover who we are The RTX effect RTX accelerates the design and manufacture of complex systems by combining advanced digital tools, scalable design approaches and manufacturing-ready thinking from the start. Here, ideas come to life with speed, confidence and efficiency. Customer outcomes What will unlock greater capability for the F-35? Matt Pess, a director at Collins Aerospace, explains how added cooling capacity will sustain system upgrades far into the future. Learn more What we do RTX pushes the limits of science and technology to design, build and support innovations that keep people flying safely and protect nations. Discover what we do Advanced aviation Discover more Civil missions Discover more Defense innovation Discover more Our businesses RTX combines the power of three industry-leading businesses: Collins Aerospace Pratt & Whitney Raytheon Discover our businesses Careers It’s time to make a difference Today and for the future, we need the smartest minds. Are you ready to join us and truly make a difference? Learn about our culture Find your next career Connect with Us Contacts Corporate and Business Headquarters RTX on LinkedIn RTX on X RTX on Facebook RTX on YouTube RTX on Instagram RSS Resources Corporate Governance Responsibility Contract Vehicles News and Press Kit News Media Resources RTX Businesses RTX Collins Aerospace Pratt & Whitney Raytheon Legal Speak Up Code of Conduct Share Price USD © 2026 RTX Accessibility Terms of use Privacy Manage cookies settings Our website uses cookies and other tools to improve the visitor experience. You can read more about these cookies and tools by clicking on the gray button. To visit our site, click on a button to choose your settings. Accept recommended settings Accept necessary cookies only Manage settings RTX.com Privacy Policy 