 Reliable AI Systems for Critical Decisions | Scale AI Scale appoints Francis deSouza as the new CEO Learn more Products Solutions Research Resources Log in Get Started Get Started The world’s most important decisions need reliable AI systems. Reliable AI has no shortcuts. Scale works across the AI stack, from the data that trains the models you rely on, to the systems that put them to work. Humans stay in the loop. Applications AI systems that actually work. Most AI deployments in enterprise and government fail. We find the right use case, build the system, and own the outcome. For Enterprise Data The data powering the world's best AI. The models at the frontier run on Scale data. We source contributors with precision (25% have advanced degrees) and deliver at the bar frontier AI demands. Explore Data Engine Scroll to explore 90% of the world's leading generative AI model builders are powered by Scale. Artificial Intelligence Real Research Life Science Medicine Energy Infrastructure Sovereignty Robotics Defense Operations Healthcare Autonomy Logistics Get started Turning raw, classified data into actionable intelligence. CDAO Partnering to accelerate Meta's LLM and Generative AI. Meta Reducing physician cognitive load by turning complex patient records into clinical intelligence. Mayo Clinic Powering an interactive AI experience that brings a century of journalism to life. Time Accelerating real estate development revenue and operations. Howard Hughes Fuelling the next generation of robotic foundation models with real-world training data. Physical Intelligence Enabling scalable, real-world Physical AI for industrial robotics. Universal Robots Benchmarking the frontier of AI capability with expert-level evaluations. Center for AI Safety Accelerating enterprise AI adoption across global energy operations. British Petroleum Enabling smarter, more personalized learning experiences for students and educators at scale. Cengage Building agentic AI that drives EBITDA gains across PE portfolio companies. Shore Capital Turning raw, classified data into actionable intelligence. CDAO Partnering to accelerate Meta's LLM and Generative AI. Meta Reducing physician cognitive load by turning complex patient records into clinical intelligence. Mayo Clinic Powering an interactive AI experience that brings a century of journalism to life. Time Accelerating real estate development revenue and operations. Howard Hughes Fuelling the next generation of robotic foundation models with real-world training data. Physical Intelligence Enabling scalable, real-world Physical AI for industrial robotics. Universal Robots Benchmarking the frontier of AI capability with expert-level evaluations. Center for AI Safety Accelerating enterprise AI adoption across global energy operations. British Petroleum Enabling smarter, more personalized learning experiences for students and educators at scale. Cengage Building agentic AI that drives EBITDA gains across PE portfolio companies. Shore Capital Turning raw, classified data into actionable intelligence. CDAO Partnering to accelerate Meta's LLM and Generative AI. Meta Reducing physician cognitive load by turning complex patient records into clinical intelligence. Mayo Clinic Powering an interactive AI experience that brings a century of journalism to life. Time Accelerating real estate development revenue and operations. Howard Hughes Fuelling the next generation of robotic foundation models with real-world training data. Physical Intelligence Enabling scalable, real-world Physical AI for industrial robotics. Universal Robots Benchmarking the frontier of AI capability with expert-level evaluations. Center for AI Safety Accelerating enterprise AI adoption across global energy operations. British Petroleum Enabling smarter, more personalized learning experiences for students and educators at scale. Cengage Building agentic AI that drives EBITDA gains across PE portfolio companies. Shore Capital Turning raw, classified data into actionable intelligence. CDAO Partnering to accelerate Meta's LLM and Generative AI. Meta Reducing physician cognitive load by turning complex patient records into clinical intelligence. Mayo Clinic Powering an interactive AI experience that brings a century of journalism to life. Time Accelerating real estate development revenue and operations. Howard Hughes Fuelling the next generation of robotic foundation models with real-world training data. Physical Intelligence Enabling scalable, real-world Physical AI for industrial robotics. Universal Robots Benchmarking the frontier of AI capability with expert-level evaluations. Center for AI Safety Accelerating enterprise AI adoption across global energy operations. British Petroleum Enabling smarter, more personalized learning experiences for students and educators at scale. Cengage Building agentic AI that drives EBITDA gains across PE portfolio companies. Shore Capital Proven across every industry. We set the benchmark for what’s possible with AI 10 years powering the world's biggest AI breakthroughs. Since 2016, we've been at the forefront; from autonomous vehicles to frontier models solving the world's hardest problems. Learn More The standard every frontier model is measured against. Our leaderboards run private benchmarks for the most ambitious AI companies to improve model capabilities. Learn more Behind the model. Behind the mission. Behind it all. Only Scale has the frontier research, world’s best data, and deployment experience to build AI that works in the real world. Learn more From the Lab to the real world. The latest from Scale. Introducing Scale Labs Mayo Clinic + Scale: Reliable AI for Better Healthcare Company How Morgan Stanley deploys AI that actually works (hint: it's evals) | Human in the Loop: Episode 13 Public Sector The Next Phase of U.S. AI Policy: Governance, Implementation, and Global Leadership Our legacy, your success. Book a demo today and see how Scale can build reliable AI for your organization. Get started Products Scale data engine Scale GenAI Portfolio Scale Donovan Solutions Enterprise Insurance Healthcare National Security US Public Sector Global Public Sector Company About Careers Security Terms Privacy Modern Slavery Statement Resources Blog Contact Us Events Documentation Data Partnerships Brand Guidelines Guides Data Labeling ML Model Training Diffusion Models Guide to AI for eCommerce Computer Vision Applications Large Language Models Reliable AI for the world’s most important decisions Manage your cookie preferences Copyright © 2026 Scale AI, Inc. All rights reserved Terms of Use & Privacy Policy 