 Semiconductor Industry Association | SIA | Voice of the Semiconductor Industry Your browser does not support the video tag. We suggest you upgrade your browser. WSTS Login Contact Skip to content Toggle navigation Brand --> Home About Mission History Board of Directors Members Join SIA SIA Team Partner Organizations SIA Jobs SEMIS 101 What are Semiconductors? Why are Semiconductors Important? How have Semiconductors Evolved Over Time? How are Semiconductors Made? What are the End Uses of Semiconductors? U.S. Industry Impact Policy Policy Overview Policy Reports Chip Incentives & Investments Tax Research Chip Design Trade Export Control/Nat’l Security Workforce & Immigration Environment, Health & Safety Supply Chain Security Anti-Counterfeiting Intellectual Property Emerging Technologies Market Data & Resources Market Data Resources Policy Reports 2026 State of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry 2025 Factbook News & Events Latest News Blog SIA News Roundup 2026 SIA Awards Dinner Events & Webinars Awards Sign Up for SIA News WSTS Login Contact Semiconductors Power the Modern World Semiconductors enable the systems and products that we use to work, communicate, travel, entertain, harness energy, treat illness, make new scientific discoveries, and more. Policy Agenda > Map of Company Investments > Map of U.S. Ecosystem > Industry Fact Sheet > Video Credit: Intel 2026 State of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry In 2026, chip technology is progressing at a breathtaking pace, propelled by cuttingedge semiconductor research, design, and manufacturing. The transistors embedded in modern semiconductors are so tiny that thousands would fit across the width of a single human hair. As technology continues to advance, semiconductors are delivering greater efficiency and performance across the economy and unleashing innovations that will define America’s economic strength, national security, and global competitiveness in the decades ahead. Learn more > Powering AI: The Semiconductor Ecosystem at the Foundation of Data Centers Semiconductors are the foundation of artificial intelligence (AI), a technology that is transforming our economy and society, making entire industries more productive and innovative, and driving major scientific breakthroughs. Learn more > Semiconductor R&D Programs: Essential Innovation for U.S. Technology Leadership To win the competition for technology leadership in industries enabled by semiconductors, such as artificial intelligence, high performance computing, advanced communications, quantum, energy, and defense—the U.S. must reaffirm itself as the epicenter of innovation for the semiconductor industry’s newest technology paradigms. To this end, the U.S. is investing in high impact R&D programs to secure the next generation of semiconductor innovation. Learn More > Winning the Chip Race: American Semiconductor Innovation and Competitiveness under the Trump Administration & the 119th Congress “Winning the Chip Race” sets forth the U.S. semiconductor industry’s policy priorities for collaboration with the Trump Administration and the 119th Congress. Policymakers should advance U.S. semiconductor leadership through coordinated, complementary efforts to promote industry innovation and competitiveness while also protecting economic and national security. Learn more > Emerging Resilience in the Semiconductor Supply Chain The report projects the United States will triple its domestic semiconductor manufacturing capacity from 2022—when the CHIPS and Science Act (CHIPS) was enacted—to 2032. The projected 203% growth is the largest projected percent increase in the world over that time. The study also projects the U.S. will grow its share of advanced logic (below 10nm) manufacturing to 28% of global capacity by 2032, up from 0% in 2022. Additionally, America is projected to capture over one-quarter (28%) of total global capital expenditures (capex) from 2024-2032, ranking second only to Taiwan (31%). In the absence of the CHIPS Act, the U.S. would have captured only 9% of global capex by 2032, according to the report. Learn More > 53.4% The U.S. semiconductor industry is the worldwide leader with more than half of global market share. 2.3M+ The industry directly employs over 342,000 people in the U.S. and supports more than 2 million additional U.S. jobs. #6 Semiconductors are a top U.S. export after refined oil, crude oil, natural gas, civilian aircraft, and automobiles. 1/5 The U.S. industry invests about one-fifth of revenue in R&D on average, among the most of any sector. Latest SIA News Global Semiconductor Sales Increase 6.4% Month-to-Month in July Press Release: 09/04/26 Michael Robbins Named President and CEO of Semiconductor Industry Association Press Release: 08/18/26 Global Semiconductor Sales Increase 35.1% from Q1 2026 to Q2 2026 Press Release: 08/06/26 View more: Press Releases Blog Policy Priorities Chip Design and R&D Research Trade Tax Export Control and National Security Policy Workforce & Immigration Environment, Health & Safety Anti-Counterfeiting Intellectual Property Emerging Technologies Supply Chain Security Who We Are SIA is the voice of the semiconductor industry, one of America’s top export industries and a key driver of our economic strength, national security, and global competitiveness. Learn More > Members > Charter Members International Members Corporate Members Corporate Partners 1101 K Street NW Suite 450, Washington, DC 20005 E-mail Sign up for SIA News © 2026 Semiconductor Industry Association. All Rights Reserved. Privacy Policy 