 Siemens home | Siemens Skip to main content Home What if AI could do an engineer’s most tedious work? We’ve launched the Eigen Engineering Agent, purpose-built AI for industrial automation engineering. It moves AI beyond generating suggestions to executing engineering tasks end-to-end. Now available for more than 600,000 TIA Portal users. Start free trial How AI transforms Engineering Building the operating system for Industrial AI Together with NVIDIA, we are building the Industrial AI operating system for the physical world. Read the latest news from our ever-expanding partnership here. Learn more Vectron X – the next dimension of rail technology The next generation of locomotives for freight and passenger transport combines the proven platform technology with app-based functionalities, open interfaces for third-party providers, in an open ecosystem – connecting people, places and portfolios more closely than ever before. Read more CASE STUDY University of Wollongong At the University of Wollongong, a digital twin brings together data from 1,000 assets, 500 BMS points, energy meters and documents, to create a single source of truth and enable efficient, data-driven operations acrossthe campus. Explore Building X A digital twin in the Amazon rainforest Deep in the Amazon, a cooperative partnered with Natura to extract essential oils from native plants. We brought a digital twin to their extraction process, cutting energy and water use while boosting income for the local community by 60%. Read the story Realize LIVE 2026 | Global events Join us to explore the future of engineering, simulation and industrial AI. Pick your location and register now. Realize LIVE Technology Upgrade reality The challenges of tomorrow demand an upgrade today. We power your ideas with artificial intelligence, simulation and smart technologies, moving you from digital blueprint to real-world impact. Artificial intelligence Digital twin Digital transformation Infrastructure Software-defined automation Sustainability Select... Artificial intelligence Digital twin Digital transformation Infrastructure Software-defined automation Sustainability Customer story all AI on the family farm helps a robot pick strawberries Meet Fravebot. It monitors plant health, spots pests early and predicts harvests two weeks out. It learned how in a digital twin first. Read customer story E-book all E-book: Industrial AI across the value chain How industrial AI is transforming every step, from product design and engineering to production and operations. Download the e-book Product spotlight all Eigen Engineering Agent for TIA Portal Purpose-built AI that autonomously plans, codes, configures and validates automation engineering tasks. Now generally available. Start free trial Customer story all AI on the family farm helps a robot pick strawberries Meet Fravebot. It monitors plant health, spots pests early and predicts harvests two weeks out. It learned how in a digital twin first. Read customer story E-book all E-book: Industrial AI across the value chain How industrial AI is transforming every step, from product design and engineering to production and operations. Download the e-book Product spotlight all Eigen Engineering Agent for TIA Portal Purpose-built AI that autonomously plans, codes, configures and validates automation engineering tasks. Now generally available. Start free trial Unlock smarter solutions with our AI offerings Discover more Marketplace Discover products and services Explore a wide range of modular and interoperable products, services and solutions to scale your business’s innovation and fuel your digital transformation. Go to marketplace Siemens Xcelerator Building X The Building X platform helps you manage and optimize building operations—from energy use and tenant comfort to maintenance, security, safety and more. Learn more Siemens Xcelerator Electrification X Electrification X combines the real and digital worlds in the Xcelerator Internet of Things (IoT) software as a service (SaaS) offering for electrification and automation to tackle the challenges of energy transition. Learn more Siemens Xcelerator Femap Create, edit and evaluate finite element models of complex products and systems using advanced computer-aided engineering (CAE) pre- and postprocessors to model components, assemblies or systems. Learn more Siemens Xcelerator Gridscale X Accelerate and secure the energy transition in a sustainable and profitable way. Learn more Siemens Xcelerator Movilitas Cloud Achieve end-to-end traceability with our powerful serialization software, automating serial number management and streamlining your manufacturing processes to ensure compliance and build a robust supply chain. Learn more Siemens Xcelerator NX X NX software helps designers and manufacturers deliver better products faster using powerful, integrated computer-aided design (CAD) and computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) solutions that realize the full value of the digital twin. Learn more Siemens Xcelerator Software assurance with Sigrid Imagine effortlessly navigating your software portfolio while connecting teams, tools and technologies. Learn more Siemens Xcelerator Solid Edge X for design Solid Edge software delivered in a secure software-as-a-service (SaaS) environment. Learn more Siemens Xcelerator Teamcenter medical device solution The ultimate product lifecycle management (PLM) add-on module for Siemens Teamcenter, specifically designed for medical technology companies. Learn more Ecosystem A network of problem solvers The Siemens ecosystem represents a vast collection of partner products, services and solutions to address your most critical business challenges. Explore the ecosystem Engineering Group Cutting-edge solutions across the industrial lifecycle Learn more Avasis Your Platinum Partner for Siemens software success Learn more Software Improvement Group Delivering software assurance for the Siemens ecosystem Learn more Sustaira Bridging the gap between technology and sustainability Learn more Aerosophia Asset management with drone intelligence Learn more Productive Machines Unlocking manufacturing productivity directly in NX CAM Learn more Module Works Toolpath software for modern manufacturing Learn more Trips group Engineering the future of industrial automation Learn more Accenture Delivering enterprise-wide digital transformation Learn more News News and breakthroughs Explore today's headlines, major partnerships and transformative breakthroughs. This is your front-row seat to the technology and expert insights that are actively engineering a more sustainable and intelligent future. Industrial AI all Bringing physical AI to the factory floor We're partnering with Humanoid to deploy the HMND 01 Alpha robot in our Erlangen factory. Built on the NVIDIA physical AI stack, it completes autonomous logistics tasks across a full shift. Signalling all Digitalizing New York City's iconic Fulton Line We've been awarded a contract by the MTA to modernize the Fulton-Liberty Lines with CBTC signaling technology, upgrading 23 stations and 65 track kilometers across Brooklyn and Queens. Smart grids all Gridscale X redefines system operations The latest evolution of our Gridscale X platform brings AI-powered, agentic capabilities to PSS®E transmission planning to accelerate studies and expand team capacity for grid operators. Explore Siemens Transforming the everyday, for multiple industries, and scaling sustainability impact About us See what drives us to make a difference Read more Insights What are the latest trends in technology? Read more Careers Change starts here. Learn more History Transforming the everyday since 1847. Read more About us See what drives us to make a difference Read more Insights What are the latest trends in technology? Read more Careers Change starts here. Learn more History Transforming the everyday since 1847. Read more 京ICP备06054295号 京公网安备 11010502040638号 