 Genesis Mission Consortium | Our Members U.S. Department of Energy | Genesis Mission Home Our Members Membership News & Events FAQ Partnership Exchange Our Members The Genesis Mission Consortium's network of members includes the Department of Energy (DOE), National Laboratories, private-sector leaders, academic institutions, and not-for-profit organizations. Private Sector · DOE National Laboratories · NNSA Plants and Sites Private Sector Accenture Federal Services accenture.com/us-en/industries/accenture-federal-services/science-research-development Accenture is a global leader in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Mission Reinvention, employing over 779,000 strategists, technologists, and domain experts across 120+ countries to serve 9,000+ clients in nearly all major industries and core business functions. Accenture Federal Services, our U.S.-based company, brings these capabilities to missions of national importance. With more than 13,000 people and 40+ years of experience supporting the U.S. Government, we deliver technology-driven outcomes while meeting stringent security and compliance requirements. We have been a trusted partner of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) and National Laboratories for more than 10 years, Across the scientific sector, our portfolio spans nearly every federal scientific agency, with active partnerships across DOE HQ, NNSA, the national labs, NSF, NOAA, CDC, NIH, USSF, VA, USPTO, DOD, NIST, NASA, and USAF. At DOE, this includes our CBOSS BPA, which continues to drive mission impact at scale. Accenture is proud to be a member of Genesis Mission Consortium, committed to serving as a solution integrator. In this role, we integrate leading technologies, data, and stakeholders to deliver scalable, cohesive outcomes. Our focus is on providing solutions that scale across DOE, National Laboratories, and the Genesis ecosystem through the following services: program management; platform strategy, onboarding, and optimization; data curation and management; scientific workflow automation; and mission adoption. Accenture is excited to offer a Unified Discovery Platform (currently in Beta) to Genesis partners that brings together leading technology solutions into a single, seamless, secure platform to accelerate scientific research. Advanced Micro Devices amd.com Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) is a global leader in high-performance and adaptive computing, delivering the technologies that power the world's most advanced scientific, artificial intelligence, and high-performance computing (HPC) systems. AMD's mission is to build products that accelerate next-generation computing experiences while enabling breakthrough innovation across science, industry, and national priorities. Within the Genesis Mission Consortium, AMD technologies power many of the world's leading supercomputers and AI systems, providing the computational foundation required to address some of the most complex challenges in energy, materials science, advanced manufacturing, climate research, national security, and scientific discovery. AMD contributes expertise spanning AI infrastructure, exascale computing, scientific computing, advanced processors, accelerators, networking, and open software ecosystems AMD plays a key role in advancing the Genesis Mission vision of doubling scientific productivity through the development of integrated AI and HPC platforms that connect scientific instruments, data, simulations, foundation models, and autonomous agents into unified discovery workflows. Through collaborations with the Department of Energy, National Laboratories, academia, and industry partners, AMD is helping establish the next generation of AI-enabled scientific infrastructure. A cornerstone of this effort is Lux, the discovery platform for the Genesis Mission, designed to accelerate the transformation of scientific workflows from instrument to insight. Lux brings together high-performance simulation, AI training and inference, foundation models, agentic systems, and composable computing resources within a sovereign, open, and precision-prioritized architecture optimized for scientific outcomes. AMD is committed to advancing open science through open-source software, open model ecosystems, transparent evaluation methodologies, and collaborative public-private partnerships. Through its participation in the Genesis Mission Consortium, AMD seeks to help build the computational and AI foundations that will accelerate scientific discovery, strengthen U.S. technology leadership, and enable the next era of American innovation. Amazon Web Services aws.amazon.com Amazon Web Services (AWS) brings substantial resources to support the Genesis Mission through a multi-year $50 billion investment in AI and supercomputing infrastructure, complemented by a $50 million credit initiative for qualifying projects. AWS SMEs and dedicated account teams provide tailored advice and solutions to DOE and NNSA missions. AWS maintains comprehensive cloud infrastructure across all classification levels, including a certified environment for Secret/Restricted Data (S/RD). With over 200 services spanning commercial, GovCloud, Secret, and Top-Secret environments, AWS has serviced as the Intelligence Community's trusted cloud provider since 2013. Capabilities span high-performance computing, AI and machine learning platforms, quantum computing, robotics, and IoT infrastructure, supporting end-to-end workflows from data processing through operational deployment. An extensive partner network of over 1,000 companies provides access to pre-vetted solutions, while AWS Marketplace offers streamlined procurement meeting government security standards. AWS technical teams collaborate directly with DOE through co-innovation partnerships, working alongside scientists and mission specialists to develop solutions and accelerate research-to-deployment timelines. Managed services reduce infrastructure complexity, while comprehensive training programs build workforce expertise. Customer-driven innovation ensures capabilities evolve with Genesis Mission Needs. Arcee AI arcee.ai Arcee is a U.S.-based AI lab building open, high-performance language models and the tools needed to adapt them for real-world work. We focus on models that are useful, transparent, and practical to deploy in serious environments. For the Genesis Mission, Arcee will help develop AI models and workflows that support scientific discovery across the national labs. They should help scientists plan experiments, work with complex data, use research tools, and move faster through the scientific process. Science does not fit into one general-purpose model. Each lab, workflow, and research area has different data, tools, and goals. Arcee will help provide a flexible foundation that allows DOE teams to adapt models for their own needs while keeping control of sensitive data and research systems. AI tools that can break down tasks, use software, check results, and improve through feedback. This can support scientific reasoning, code modernization, simulation workflows, multimodal data, and "co-scientist" environments where multiple models work together on hard problems. Our approach emphasizes transparency, evaluation, and access to the pieces needed to understand how models are trained, adapted, and tested. Researchers need confidence in both the model's answers and the processes behind it. By combining Arcee's open model development with the Genesis Mission's scientific data, facilities, and compute infrastructure, we can help accelerate research, reduce friction for scientists, and support the next generation of American scientific AI. Astera Institute astera.org The Astera Institute is a science and technology philanthropy dedicated to accelerating discovery by experimenting with how research is funded and executed, including new ways of publishing methods, data, and results that do not rely on traditional peer-review platforms. We are fully committed to the principles of open science and the importance of FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) scientific outputs. Within the Genesis Mission Consortium, Astera brings deep expertise in open science infrastructure, AI-ready data systems, and the development of tools and platforms for the rapid publication of usable scientific information. Our open science team is actively building tools, frameworks, and policies that anticipate an AI-native future for science communication. Astera's contributions to the Genesis Mission are twofold. First, we offer a technical and advisory capacity to help Genesis Mission teams develop automated workflows for data capture, annotation, and deposition alongside open publishing infrastructure already in operation. This provides a concrete path toward addressing the challenges of slow dissemination, poor data standardization, and the absence of machine-readable outputs. Second, Astera is contributing GPU compute credits through pre-purchased capacity on Voltage Park's cloud infrastructure, available to Astera partners for AI model training, inference, and large-scale scientific computing workloads. Together, these contributions support the Genesis Mission's vision of integrating advanced AI infrastructure and scientific datasets into a coordinated, high-impact discovery engine. Astris AI astrisai.com Lockheed Martin's Astris AI delivers a sovereign AI platform built so that mission owners — not a third-party intermediary — retain ownership of their models, weights, and deployment, with no black box and no vendor lock-in. The platform is proven mission-ready today, with deployments operational across more than 30 classified and highly secure government environments, engineered for air-gapped, disconnected, and ICD-705-compliant operations. The platform integrates three capabilities into a single stack: secure generative AI with search, retrieval, and agentic workflows; enterprise-wide governance, security, routing, and observability; and full MLOps lifecycle management covering model deployment, evaluation, fine-tuning, and monitoring. Astris AI delivers all of it as one integrated, mission-ready platform — reducing integration risk and accelerating the path from pilot to operational advantage. Beyond the platform itself, Astris AI helps organizations apply AI safely to their most complex tasks and engineering problems. Our AI team engages directly with mission partners to scope, organize, build, and scale mission-critical AI applications. Within the Genesis Mission Consortium, Astris AI brings this sovereign platform, this team, and Lockheed Martin's decades of mission-critical engineering experience to DOE and the National Laboratories — helping ensure sensitive data, models, and infrastructure never leave the mission's boundary while still moving at the speed AI-enabled science demands. Biohub biohub.org Biohub is a nonprofit research organization developing frontier artificial intelligence for biology to prevent and cure disease. We build models that learn from biology, can make new scientific discoveries, and accelerate progress on the most fundamental problems in the understanding of human disease. Our scientific platforms integrate artificial intelligence with frontier instrumentation and imaging capabilities across scales ranging from the atomic level to living organisms. We build leading models for programmable biology, including the ESM language models which are powering breakthrough advances in modeling proteins, and unlocking the design of therapeutic molecules. Our models, tools, and datasets are openly available. These technologies power scientists around the world, translating AI progress into resources that speed research and make discoveries possible across the scientific community. In 2026 Biohub launched the Virtual Biology Initiative, an international effort to create the multi-modal datasets and technological capabilities needed to build predictive models of life. Achieving this requires a significant, coordinated effort involving leading scientific research institutions, consortia, and funders. Biohub committed anchor funding, technology development, and creation of shared infrastructure for the initiative, which serves as an open data resource for the scientific community. Its resources, along with Biohub’s own openly available datasets and AI models, will help accelerate scientific research across national labs, academic universities, research institutions and industry. Biohub shares the Genesis Mission goals to build an integrated AI platform, scientific datasets and foundation models to advance AI-enabled scientific discovery and accelerate breakthroughs. As a member of the Genesis Mission Consortium, Biohub will bring its expertise, atlases and technologies to drive a new era of science and technology exploration. Cerebras Systems cerebras.ai Cerebras Systems builds the world's fastest AI inference and training systems, powered by the Wafer-Scale Engine (WSE) — the largest computer chip ever built and the most powerful AI processor in industry. Purpose-built for AI, each CS-3 system delivers the compute performance of a GPU cluster in a single standard rack-compatible appliance, with a fraction of the space and power footprint. Cerebras is a proud U.S. company and longstanding partner of the Department of Energy, with active system deployments and ongoing research collaborations at Sandia National Laboratories, Argonne National Laboratory, NETL, and LLNL. Our work with Sandia and the NNSA Tri-Labs has produced landmark results — including trillion-parameter AI model training and one of the fastest molecular dynamics simulations on record. As a Genesis Mission Consortium member, Cerebras is committed to advancing AI for science and national security — contributing inference and training capabilities, technical expertise, and deep national laboratory partnerships to help accelerate the mission. Cognition cognition.com More information coming soon. CoreWeave coreweave.com CoreWeave is the Essential Cloud for AI, a full-stack platform of infrastructure, software, and technical expertise purpose-built for the demands of modern AI. CoreWeave has become one of the fastest-growing cloud platforms in the industry, with nearly a gigawatt of active power across dozens data centers globally and a computing footprint trusted by nine of the top ten AI model providers. The company's platform spans GPU and CPU compute, purpose-built networking, high-throughput storage, and an operating layer for security, observability, and infrastructure management at scale. Through its participation in the Genesis Mission Consortium, CoreWeave commits to help build the computational and AI infrastructure foundations that will accelerate scientific discovery, strengthen U.S. science, technology and energy innovation, enhance national security, and power American global leadership in AI. Cornelis Networks cornelisnetworks.com Cornelis Networks, an American company, offers the fastest and most open high-performance networking solutions for AI/HPC. We design and build complete networking solutions including semiconductors, systems, and software to get the best performance possible. Cornelis provides the only purpose-built high-performance network solutions that support all major CPU and GPU architectures and are available from any server OEM. Since our founding, Cornelis has been proud to partner with the U.S. Department of Energy on R&D programs to advance the state of the art and large-scale computing system deployments in support of their missions. Cornelis is collaborating with DOE and our industry partners on Genesis Mission to define the future architecture for AI/HPC infrastructure. The underlying infrastructure choices will have as much impact on the performance, capabilities, user access, and security as the workloads themselves. The future AI and high-performance computing infrastructure, with the latest processors connected by extremely fast networks, will provide the computational foundation for continued U.S. leadership in energy development, national security, and scientific discovery. Databricks databricks.com Databricks is the Data and AI company, trusted by more than 20,000 organizations worldwide—including commercial giants like AT&T, Mastercard, and 70% of the Fortune 500, as well as 80% of U.S. federal executive departments. Databricks offers a unified platform built on an open lakehouse architecture that brings data, analytics, and AI together in a single, secure environment. By consolidating disparate data sources, organizations can eliminate silos and unlock the full power of their data without rebuilding core legacy systems. As a member of the Genesis Mission Consortium, Databricks provides the foundation to enable secure, governed collaboration across national laboratories, universities, industry, and federal agencies. Through core platform capabilities like Unity Catalog, Lakeflow, and Agent Bricks, the platform is uniquely positioned to help consortium partners seamlessly deploy secure data workflows and next-generation AI agents. By transforming complex datasets into a scalable engine for innovation, Databricks serves as a catalyst to accelerate tomorrow's scientific discovery, optimize future industrial manufacturing, and secure the advanced capabilities required for long-term mission success. Dataerai dataerai.com Dataerai ("data-array") was founded on a conviction that the next era of discovery and innovation will be defined by how quickly we can turn the world's most complex scientific and engineering data into fuel for AI. From research laboratories to factory floors, the bottleneck for AI-driven progress is no longer computing power or algorithms—it is access to high-quality, AI-ready data. Dataerai provides the infrastructure that removes this bottleneck. Our platform automatically captures data and rich metadata from instruments, simulations, manufacturing systems, and analysis pipelines at the moment of generation, organizing them into consistent, machine-readable formats with built-in traceability. Designed for distributed environments, the platform allows organizations to keep data securely on-premises or in the cloud while connecting it through a shared layer for search, discovery, and collaboration, all without centralizing or duplicating sensitive data. Today, much of the data produced by federal investments is used once and never again, making it an enormous untapped national asset. As a member of the Genesis Mission Consortium, Dataerai is working with the Department of Energy to change that. Dataerai contributes expertise in data infrastructure, interoperability, attribution, and provenance to make scientific and engineering data discoverable, accessible, reusable, and AI-ready. We are advancing automated data curation so scientific results are AI-ready from the moment they are created; building the high-throughput data backbones behind digital twins and autonomous laboratories; and developing new ways to track how data assets are used, making visible the full return on America's R&D investments. Founded by leaders in AI for science, data infrastructure, and national technology policy, Dataerai serves national laboratories, federal agencies, universities, and industry alike to connect the nation's data so that every experiment makes the next one smarter. Dell Technologies dell.com Dell Technologies is a trusted infrastructure and innovation partner supporting the Department of Energy’s Mission Genesis Consortium through AI-ready high-performance computing, scalable data infrastructure, and secure platform integration. Dell’s role is to help DOE and its national laboratories operationalize the Genesis vision by connecting advanced compute, data, and AI capabilities that accelerate scientific discovery, strengthen national security research, and advance energy innovation. Domino Data Lab domino.ai Domino Data Lab is a data science “engine” that gives research teams a single, standardized place to develop models, run and track experiments, and deploy AI under governance, instead of stitching those steps together across disconnected tools. Teams can move from a first hypothesis to a system running in production without giving up the security, audit trail, and reproducibility that classified and mission-critical science depend on. Domino also runs on whatever infrastructure an organization already has, from on-premises HPC to cloud and hybrid/multi-cloud, with no vendor lock-in. This flexibility is important for a federated program like the Genesis Mission, which spans DOE's 17 National Laboratories, several agencies, and many private-sector partners. Domino already supports organizations with strict security and regulatory requirements, including major pharmaceutical and life-sciences firms, the U.S. Department of the Navy, and federal agencies. 20 percent of the Fortune 100 run data science development on Domino today. Dow dow.com Dow is one of the world’s leading materials science companies, serving customers in high-growth markets such as packaging, infrastructure, mobility, and consumer applications. Our global breadth, asset integration and scale, customer-focused innovation, and leading business positions enable us to achieve profitable growth and help deliver a sustainable future. Within the Genesis Mission Consortium, Dow is positioned to serve as an industrial validation and scale-up partner, helping connect AI-enabled discovery workflows with real-world materials, process, and application challenges. Dow can provide access to deep domain expertise and world-class experimental, high-throughput, and pilot-scale capabilities, enabling rigorous validation, scale-up, and translation of AI-enabled solutions into deployable technologies with measurable industrial impact for Genesis partners and the broader U.S. manufacturing ecosystem. DrivenData drivendata.co DrivenData helps scientific organizations evaluate and operationalize AI at scale, turning ambitious research goals into measurable AI progress. We are distinguished by our specialization in challenge-driven innovation, AI-ready data infrastructure, and benchmarking and evaluation frameworks that accelerate scientific discovery. DrivenData brings core capabilities to the Genesis ecosystem: the ability to convert complex scientific problems into AI-ready datasets, rigorous benchmarks and competitive evaluation environments, and collaborative innovation programs. Through our open innovation platform, tooling, and community of 125,000+ data scientists, we help teams to expand and accelerate the generation of reproducible, transparent, and operationally relevant AI for Science. Since 2014, we have designed and operated more than 150 machine learning challenges and innovation programs, working with NASA, DOE, NIST, NOAA, NIH, CDC, ARPA-H, the Bureau of Reclamation, National Laboratories, and other federal agencies. We currently serve as a NASA prime contractor under the Open Innovation Services (NOIS3) contract and are a founding signatory to the Genesis Mission MOU. Our work spans scientific domains central to the Genesis Mission. For the Bureau of Reclamation and NASA, we designed and operated the Water Supply Forecast Rodeo, a $500,000 live forecasting competition that advanced probabilistic streamflow prediction across 17 western states. For NASA's Goddard, we led the Mars Spectrometry Challenge, in which more than 1,200 participants submitted 7,800 models that ultimately improved geochemical classification performance by 43 percent for instruments supporting the Curiosity rover mission. We also convened a multi-agency partnership, including NASA, NOAA, EPA, USGS, and others, to develop CyFi, an open-source AI system for detecting harmful algal blooms from satellite imagery. Through the Genesis Mission, we are committed to helping laboratories, universities, and industry partners create lighthouse challenges, develop AI-ready scientific datasets, evaluate and test AI systems, and accelerate the transition from promising research to deployed scientific capability. Edison Scientific edisonscientific.com Edison Scientific is building the AI platform for scientific research and development. Kosmos, Edison’s collaborative AI scientist, partners with R&D teams to support critical decisions and workflows, leverage their proprietary data, and bring innovations to market faster. Edison is a scientist-led company that was spun out of the nonprofit research lab FutureHouse in 2025. Within the Genesis Mission Consortium, Edison is bringing Kosmos across DOE and National Laboratory teams to accelerate research across mission areas. Researchers can train Kosmos on their own data, workflows, and expert judgment, building a proprietary AI research capability that compounds with use and stays with their organization. Emerald AI emeraldai.co Emerald AI turns AI data centers—which place unprecedented power demands on the electrical grid—into flexible, valuable partners that actively help stabilize it. Emerald Conductor software platform allows these data centers to intelligently adjust how much power they use and when they use it, coordinating across multiple locations to act like flexible power sources for the electrical grid. Backed by NVIDIA, and supported by leading energy companies including AES, Constellation, and NextEra Energy, Emerald AI sits at the intersection of the world’s two most critical infrastructure networks: power grids and data centers. Research estimates the existing U.S. grid could accommodate up to 100 gigawatts of new flexible load—and our software is designed to unlock that capacity, supporting over a decade of AI growth while keeping electricity affordable and reliable for everyone. Essential Knowledge Systems eskns.com Essential Knowledge Systems (EKS) has developed proprietary AI training software that can be applied to virtually any AI model. Using Frontier at Oak Ridge National Laboratory and the University of Texas at Austin's Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC), we have demonstrated the ability to: - Consistently reduce AI training compute time (including electricity consumption, cloud usage, and token costs) by 5x-10x, while reducing inference costs by up to 2x. - Reduce training compute time by 24x on Frontier at Oak Ridge National Laboratory by modifying the ORBIT vision transformer model family. This result was unusually high, even by our standards, largely because our training technology is not susceptible to lowered final accuracy somtimes associated with larger training batch sizes. Our technology can train with batches as large as available memory capacity allows while resulting in the maximum accuracy possible. - Improve model accuracy while increasing efficiency. We have not observed any tradeoffs or sacrifices in performance, and every AI model we have modified has achieved higher accuracy than it was capable of before our enhancements. Foundation for Energy Security and Innovation fesi.org Foundation for Energy Security and Innovation (FESI) is the official nonprofit partner of the U.S. Department of Energy, created to accelerate the commercialization of America’s most promising technologies in support of U.S. energy security, prosperity, and leadership. Chartered by Congress in the bipartisan CHIPS and Science Act and launched in 2025, FESI is mission-aligned with DOE and uniquely positioned to engage private capital, industry partners, and philanthropy in ways government alone cannot. FESI aligns stakeholders and capital around shared commercialization opportunities: helping DOE, the National Labs, industry, and investors identify where they should engage and why. FESI can help catalyze the conditions to enable scientific promise to reach real-world deployment by pooling philanthropic and private capital, connecting key stakeholders, and directing both toward the stages of development where promising technologies most often stall. Google Public Sector publicsector.google Google Public Sector is dedicated to providing secure-by-design and best-in-class technology to government agencies, educational institutions, and partners. They provide an integrated AI stack and solutions—from advanced artificial intelligence (AI) and cutting-edge data analytics to a planet-scale infrastructure. Google Public Sector empowers organizations to securely advance their mission, support decision making, unlock new levels of productivity, and transform how services are delivered. HPE hpe.com HPE is the global leader in supercomputing and AI, bringing powerful capabilities to advancing the development of AI, quantum computing, and next-generation high performance computing (HPC) to drive scientific breakthroughs. Together with the U.S. Department of Energy and its national laboratories, HPE ushered in the world’s first exascale supercomputers for the U.S. and has built upon this innovation and strong public-private partnership to deliver large-scale AI systems as part of Genesis Mission. HPE is advancing Genesis Mission’s initiatives by building full AI stacks that integrate state-of-the-art accelerators, networking, storage, software and 100% direct liquid cooling. As part of HPE’s involvement, its world-leading services team provides specialized onsite servicing from delivery and deployment, to testing and management, to ensure optimal performance, resilience and security for the systems and the data and AI running on them. HPE will closely partner with the DOE to support critical R&D to co-design and co-develop future technologies to achieve the national imperative of advancing science and engineering via the Lighthouse Challenges and address next-generation HPC, AI and quantum computing needs. IBM research.ibm.com Since its inception, IBM has been laser focused on developing what’s next in computing. To IBM this always means shooting for the moon. The problems we want to solve aren’t purely academic; they’re not just thought experiments. Modeling financial systems, simulating the properties of new materials, developing more efficient batteries — these are just a few examples of the pressing, real-world problems that IBM, its partners, and businesses, care about. They also present some of the most difficult computations for classical computers to grapple with. Within Project Genesis, IBM will work on deploying quantum computing systems and solutions that can accelerate research on Genesis problems. IBM will integrate those quantum systems within the Department of Energy’s computational infrastructure, and will develop software, algorithms, and applications that can bring the unprecedented capability of Quantum Computing to address the Genesis Program challenges in fundamentally new ways. IBM’s approach is firmly in line with what famed physicist Richard Feynman predicted decades before the first quantum computer ever existed. Nature is inherently quantum, and if we want to simulate quantum mechanics, we need to use a quantum computer. IBM will deploy our research and development expertise in silicon technology, advanced computing, in AI, and most specially in Quantum Computing in support of our work within the Genesis program. In all our Genesis activities, IBM will be pleased to collaborate with the Genesis Consortium and with Genesis partners. Illinois Quantum & Microelectronics Park iqmp.org The Illinois Quantum and Microelectronics Park (IQMP) is a first-of-its-kind innovation campus dedicated to accelerating the development, scale-up, and commercialization of quantum technologies and advanced microelectronics. Located in Illinois and anchored by an ecosystem of industry, academia, national laboratories, government partners, manufacturers, suppliers, and end users, IQMP is designed to bridge the gap between research breakthroughs and real-world deployment. As a member of the Genesis Mission Consortium, IQMP will support technology development, workforce training, supply chain growth, and public-private partnerships across the quantum and advanced computing ecosystem, with a special focus on the intersection of quantum and AI. IQMP brings together stakeholders spanning quantum computing, quantum networking, quantum sensing, microelectronics, high-performance computing (HPC), artificial intelligence, advanced manufacturing, and supporting infrastructure to address critical challenges in technology maturation, integration, and commercialization. Intel Corporation intel.com For nearly six decades, Intel Corporation has stood as a proud symbol of American ingenuity, innovation, and industrial strength. From the world's first commercially available microprocessor in 1971, Intel has consistently led the world in technological achievement, setting the standard for performance, reliability, and innovation that competitors have spent decades trying to match. As the only American company that both designs and manufactures leading-edge logic semiconductors at scale in the U.S., Intel Foundry's investments in domestic fabrication and advanced packaging directly support the microelectronics ambitions of the Genesis Mission and the broader national priority of a secure, resilient semiconductor supply chain. Intel works with laboratories to architect heterogeneous systems that match the right compute to the right stage of the AI pipeline, from data ingest through model training to deployed inference at the edge of experiments. Intel has extensive experience in automation and robotics as our Edge AI solutions brings validated systems, industry-optimized software stacks, and open development tools together to unify real-time control and multimodal intelligence. Intel is also developing silicon-based spin qubits, leveraging its existing manufacturing infrastructure to offer a promising pathway toward scalable, fault tolerant quantum computing. Intel technology has powered discovery across the DOE laboratory complex for generations of systems, from the earliest massively parallel machines to today's exascale era. The Aurora supercomputer at Argonne National Laboratory, built on Intel technology, stands among the first exascale systems in the world and serves as a foundation for training and deploying scientific AI models at an unprecedented scale. As part of the Consortium, Intel is engaging across the mission's challenge areas contributing expertise in a range of critical areas including: advanced HPC and AI system architecture; open and portable software for scientific AI; secure computing; robotics and automation; quantum computing; and domestic semiconductor design and manufacturing capabilities. Medra medra.ai Medra is building the Physical AI Scientist, a closed-loop platform that pairs the AI Experimentalist, a scientific reasoning layer that turns natural-language goals into executable experimental plans, with the Physical AI Lab, a robotics-driven wet-lab execution layer. Together they design, execute, interpret, and improve experiments in a continuous loop, generating structured data and validating model predictions in the real world to provide the infrastructure needed to train and deploy AI in biology at scale. As a member of the Genesis Mission Consortium, Medra will share access to Medra Labs, including Medra Lab 001, the largest fully-connected autonomous lab for biology in the US, and subject matter expertise to accelerate breakthroughs across the sciences. Microsoft microsoft.com Microsoft Corporation is a global technology company whose mission is to empower every person and every organization on the planet to achieve more. Microsoft delivers secure, scalable technologies spanning artificial intelligence, cloud computing, advanced analytics, cybersecurity, developer platforms, and scientific research to help organizations solve complex challenges and accelerate innovation. Through partnerships with government agencies, national laboratories, universities, and industry, Microsoft supports breakthroughs in science, energy, national security, healthcare, sustainability, and economic development. The company combines world-class research, trusted cloud infrastructure, and advanced AI capabilities to enable collaboration, data-driven discovery, and mission-focused outcomes at scale. As a Genesis Mission consortium partner, Microsoft contributes expertise in AI-enabled scientific discovery, high-performance computing, cloud infrastructure, cybersecurity, data platforms, and collaborative research. Microsoft works alongside consortium members to accelerate scientific advancement, support multidisciplinary research, and help transform emerging ideas into real-world impact across energy, materials science, biosecurity, quantum science, and other mission-critical domains. NVIDIA nvidia.com More information coming soon. OpenAI openai.com OpenAI is an AI research and deployment company focused on developing artificial intelligence that benefits humanity. Through advanced foundation models and AI products including ChatGPT and the OpenAI API, OpenAI helps researchers, scientists, engineers, and organizations accelerate discovery, improve productivity, and solve complex problems responsibly. Within the Genesis Mission Consortium, OpenAI is committed to supporting the Department of Energy, the National Laboratories, academia, and industry partners by advancing the safe and effective application of frontier AI to scientific research. Our technologies can assist researchers with literature review, software development, data analysis, scientific reasoning, and collaboration while helping organizations deploy AI responsibly through strong security, governance, and human oversight. OpenAI looks forward to collaborating across the consortium to accelerate scientific discovery, expand access to advanced AI capabilities, and help enable breakthroughs that advance energy, national security, and scientific innovation. OpenMined openmined.org More information coming soon. Palantir palantir.com More information coming soon. Periodic Labs periodic.com Periodic Labs’ core strength is the integration of deep expertise across three tightly coupled pillars: AI/ML, experimental and computational materials science, and autonomous laboratory operations. Staff from each pillar will be available to collaborate with consortium members and National Labs on Genesis Mission challenges. Periodic Labs’ platform can bring a unified intelligence layer to DOE-funded scientific projects and National Labs, allowing DOE to retain and organize data under a singular platform, train models on that data, unify their data systems, and unlock DOE-guided agentic capabilities for the scientists and engineers supported by DOE. Prometheus More information coming soon. Reflection reflection.ai Reflection is a research lab making intelligence open and accessible for everyone to use, customize, and build on. We build AI systems that give enterprises, governments, and sovereign entities control over their intelligence, while delivering the highest standards of performance and safety. Our mission: make intelligence open and accessible to all. Renaissance Philanthropy renaissancephilanthropy.org Renaissance Philanthropy was founded to increase ambition in science, technology, and innovation by making it easier for donors to support breakthroughs through time-bound, thesis-driven philanthropy. In our first two years, we have catalyzed $533 million in philanthropic capital to advance our mission. Renaissance Philanthropy is committed to working with the Genesis Mission Consortium to increase philanthropic support for AI for Science. We are particularly excited about working with scientists to identify shared resources that will accelerate progress in key fields, in the same way that the Protein Data Bank and CASP have transformed protein structure prediction and protein design. SambaNova Systems sambanova.ai SambaNova Systems is a full-stack artificial intelligence company delivering the hardware, software, and models that run the largest AI workloads. Built on its purpose-built processors (Reconfigurable Dataflow Unit – RDU), the platform delivers high-throughput, high-concurrency premium inference on air-cooled systems - the efficiency and performance demanded by scientific and national security workloads. Within the Genesis Mission Consortium, SambaNova’s contribution centers on sovereign, on-premises, open-weight model inference - enabling the DOE National Laboratories and NNSA sites to run state-of-the-art models on controlled and sensitive data without that data ever leaving the facility. As the Genesis Mission works to double scientific productivity with AI by connecting instruments, data, simulations, and foundation models into unified discovery workflows, SambaNova ensures that work can proceed in the most secure environments. SambaNova brings direct experience deploying production AI inside the DOE complex, with systems in operation across national laboratory environments, accelerating large-model inference alongside traditional HPC. This footprint gives SambaNova firsthand understanding of the security, integration, and mission requirements unique to the laboratory ecosystem. By combining frontier-model performance with full data sovereignty, SambaNova helps the Genesis Mission deliver secure, AI-enabled discovery at the speed of mission - strengthening U.S. scientific leadership and national security for the next era of American innovation. Scale AI scale.com Scale AI is the nation's leading provider of AI data, evaluation, and model-readiness infrastructure, supporting both the federal government and the world's leading frontier AI labs in accelerating the reliable deployment of artificial intelligence. Founded in 2016, Scale's mission within the Genesis Mission Consortium is to provide the foundational data and agentic infrastructure that make trustworthy, reproducible AI possible across the Mission's 26 Challenge Areas. Scale contributes two capabilities that span nearly every Challenge Area. First, high-quality data labeling and curation for computer vision and robotics — the same Data Engine that has produced training data for 90% of the world's leading frontier models, applied to the sensor modalities that power autonomous lab systems for inspection, characterization, and hazardous-environment experimentation. Scale has delivered over 200 million annotations to U.S. government partners with SLA-guaranteed quality metrics exceeding 95% F1. Second, AI agents that interface with existing modeling and simulation infrastructure so scientists can iterate in minutes rather than days. This pattern has already been proven at scale through DIU Thunderforge, where Scale's agents integrated with DoD modeling and simulation tools for military planning. Scale's infrastructure is deployed across every major classification level and underpins T&E, red-teaming, and post-training work for DoD, IC, and federal partners. Within the Consortium, Scale offers a model-agnostic, traceable, and government-purpose-rights platform ensuring no vendor lock-in and a clear path from unclassified demonstration to classified deployment. Scale is committed to advancing the Genesis Mission's goal of trustworthy, science-grounded AI at national scale. Schmidt Sciences schmidtsciences.org Schmidt Sciences is a nonprofit organization founded in 2024 by Eric and Wendy Schmidt that works to accelerate scientific knowledge and breakthroughs with the most promising, advanced tools to support a thriving planet. The organization prioritizes research in areas poised for impact including AI and advanced computing, astrophysics, biosciences, climate, and space—as well as supporting researchers in a variety of disciplines through its science systems program. SeedAI seedai.org SeedAI is a nonprofit working to establish AI-readiness for the United States. We run Accelerate Science Now, a coalition of 80+ leading organizations form industry, academia, and civil society, focused on accelerating scientific discovery around the potential of AI. We design policies, programs, and pilots that can accelerate progress and ignite a new era of scientific discovery. Siemens siemens.com More information coming soon. Undermind undermind.ai Undermind builds AI research agents that give scientists, and their AI agents, command of the world's scientific knowledge. It reasons across thousands of papers to deliver comprehensive, citation-backed analyses that researchers, and the agents they build, can trust and verify, and it's used today by researchers at thousands of universities and by R&D teams across industry, including deployments at some of the world's largest pharmaceutical and chemical companies. For the Genesis Mission, Undermind is core infrastructure for the autonomous research loop: any agent can attach via API/MCP to combine its own local data and tools with deep, reliable knowledge of the published literature. Genesis scientists can use Undermind directly through our web app, and also plug it into their own research agents. Veritone veritone.com Veritone is an enterprise artificial intelligence company specializing in AI-powered data transformation, workflows and mission-focused applications. Its aiWARE™ platform orchestrates an open and ever-expanding ecosystem of machine learning models to help organizations transform large volumes of audio, video, text and other unstructured data into actionable intelligence. Founded in 2014, Veritone actively serves thousands of enterprise, government, and public-sector customers, including the NCAA, CBS News, the Department of Justice, the Department of Defense and the majority of the world's leading frontier AI labs and hyperscalers. As a Genesis Mission Consortium partner, Veritone will contribute its expertise and industry-leading solutions in AI-ready data, secure AI deployment and advanced analytics to help modernize the data infrastructure supporting American scientific research. Veritone will work with the U.S. Department of Energy and other consortium members to explore how fragmented scientific and engineering datasets can be securely transformed into governed AI-ready assets. Veritone Data Refinery and Digital Media Hub can help organize, enrich and activate large-scale data archives for advanced AI and machine learning model training. By making complex datasets more accessible and useful, these capabilities can support scientific analytics, automated research workflows and the development of AI-enabled “co-scientist” applications. Veritone’s open-architecture aiWARE platform enables organizations to deploy multiple AI models and select the appropriate capabilities for specific research challenges while maintaining control over their data, infrastructure and workflows. Veritone also brings experience supporting public-sector and regulated organizations, with technologies that can operate within secure government cloud and FedRAMP-authorized environments. Through its participation, Veritone will help explore new ways to turn passive data archives into active research assets, streamline data-intensive workflows and accelerate the path from scientific inquiry to meaningful outcomes. These contributions will support the Genesis Mission’s goals of increasing the productivity of American science, advancing energy innovation, strengthening national security and reinforcing U.S. leadership in AI and advanced computing. Wiley wiley.com Wiley (NYSE: WLY) is a global leader in authoritative content and research intelligence for the advancement of scientific discovery, innovation, and learning. With more than 200 years at the center of the scholarly ecosystem, Wiley combines trusted publishing heritage with AI-powered platforms to transform how knowledge is discovered, accessed, and applied. From individual researchers and students to Fortune 500 R&D teams, Wiley enables the transformation of scientific breakthroughs into real-world impact. From knowledge to impact—Wiley is redefining what's possible in science and learning. DOE National Laboratories Ames National Laboratory ameslab.gov Ames National Laboratory integrates materials science, chemistry, condensed matter physics, and computational science to connect discovery with scalable solutions for national priorities in energy, manufacturing, and critical materials. Ames Laboratory’s decades of leadership in AI/ML tools for accelerated materials discovery are integrated with the Genesis Mission vision for intelligent, high-performance scientific infrastructure, accelerating breakthroughs that translate to real-world impact. Our expertise in materials science and engineering, rare earth science, automated chemistry, and critical materials supports Genesis Mission priorities, particularly those involving critical materials with implications for economic resilience and national security. To reduce foreign supply chain dependence, Ames leverages its leadership in key multi-laboratory efforts, such as the Critical Materials Innovation Hub and the Minerals to Materials Supply Chain Research Facility (METALLIC), and Ames Laboratory’s unique capabilities including the Materials Preparation Center and the Advanced Magnet Facility. Employing the Genesis methodology—coupling human insight with AI-guided discovery—we will rapidly deliver mission-ready alloys, permanent magnets, and composites for national defense and advanced manufacturing, while also focusing on optimizing resource recovery and creating high-performance substitutes. Ames National Laboratory’s efforts in materials discovery integrates AI/ML, computational approaches, genetic algorithms, and high-performance computing. We are leaders in the development and application of high-performance computational chemistry, and are leveraging quantum computing to predict both chemical and correlated material behavior. Our efforts in Genesis will integrate these developments with AI models to accelerate prediction and synthesis of new molecules and materials with transformative properties, in order to advance biological approaches for critical material recovery, elucidation of catalyst behaviors, performance of alloys in extreme environments, and discovery and understanding of quantum materials that challenge our present understanding. Argonne National Laboratory anl.gov More information coming soon. Brookhaven National Laboratory bnl.gov Brookhaven National Laboratory’s nearly 3,000 staff are driven by a common vision: Harnessing AI-accelerated discovery to be the Nation’s leading national lab for scientific breakthroughs that secure America’s future. With seven Nobel Prize-winning discoveries and 79 years of pioneering research, BNL is a multi-program laboratory that brings unique strengths and capabilities to the DOE lab system. The Lab’s science and operations staff work together to implement a bold vision centered on AI-accelerated discovery science, aligned with national priorities and the Genesis Mission. BNL has a key role in advancing DOE’s mission with a focus on U.S. supremacy in discovery science; AI for science and science of AI; quantum information science; onshoring microelectronics; scaling the biotechnology revolution, and securing America’s critical mineral supply. Brookhaven researchers and industry partners will take on key roles in tackling Genesis Mission science and technology challenges related to manufacturing advanced microelectronics, operating and securing the electric grid, and exploring connections between the smallest building blocks of matter and the largest structures in the universe, among other efforts. Brookhaven will provide critical contributions through its DOE Office of Science user facilities, including the National Synchrotron Light Source II, Center for Functional Nanomaterials, and Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider. Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory fnal.gov Fermilab is America’s particle physics and accelerator laboratory, keeping the nation at the forefront of discovery and innovation. Building on decades of pioneering work in particle physics and accelerator technology, this U.S. Department of Energy national laboratory also drives breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, quantum science, advanced computing, and next generation microelectronics — technologies that power progress in industry, medicine, energy, and national security. Through this combination of scientific depth and technological leadership, Fermilab helps address some of society’s most pressing challenges. The lab is also a hub for innovation, collaboration, and technological advances, bringing together scientists, engineers, and partners. Fermilab’s contributions to the Genesis Mission build on this foundation of innovation driven by the needs of particle physics, detector development, accelerator science, theory, and quantum information. These frontier challenges have shaped a powerful AI ecosystem that aligns naturally with the goals of the Genesis Mission. Fermilab’s core AI strengths include intelligent edge sensing through efficient AI and microelectronics co-design enabling nanosecond-to-millisecond decision-making; advanced control and operations powered by surrogate modeling, optimization, and low latency feedback; and robust, interpretable AI grounded in uncertainty quantification and domain adaptation. The lab also operates one of the world’s largest scientific data platforms, efficiently serving more than one exabyte of data per year to global experiments. By combining these capabilities — extreme environment microelectronics, cutting-edge AI, quantum and advanced computing expertise, and leadership in data-intensive science — Fermilab offers the Genesis Mission a uniquely integrated environment where frontier technologies, extreme-scale data, and high precision scientific instrumentation accelerate discovery and enable transformative new technologies. Idaho National Laboratory inl.gov Idaho National Laboratory is one of the U.S. Department of Energy's (DOE's) national laboratories. The laboratory performs work in each of DOE's strategic goal areas: energy, national security, science and environment. INL is the nation's leading center for nuclear energy research and development. Within the Genesis Mission Consortium, INL leads Prometheus — the grand challenge focused on delivering nuclear energy that is faster, safer, and cheaper. Prometheus applies artificial intelligence across the full nuclear reactor lifecycle, from design and licensing through manufacturing, construction, and operations, targeting at least a 2x acceleration in deployment timelines and more than 50% reduction in operational costs. INL's contributions to the Consortium extend well beyond Prometheus. With a workforce of more than 6,000 experts, INL brings capabilities across advanced energy systems, grid resilience, cybersecurity, digital engineering, and national security — available to support working groups, pilot efforts, and collaborative initiatives across the Consortium. Members have access to unique laboratory facilities and research infrastructure, including test beds, demonstration environments, and specialized user facilities, all governed by standard DOE user agreements. INL also contributes modeling, simulation, and digital engineering capabilities for system-level analysis and risk-informed decision support, alongside high-performance computing resources and applied AI and machine learning tools operating within secure data environments. These capabilities are complemented by INL's extensive intellectual assets — technologies, software, data, and domain expertise — which INL leverages to advance technology transfer and help move Consortium-relevant innovations toward real-world deployment. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory lbl.gov Through advanced computation, network facilities, and data integration, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (Berkeley Lab) is supporting the Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission, a historic national effort to build the world’s most powerful scientific platform to accelerate discovery, strengthen national security, and drive energy innovation. Founded in 1931 on the belief that the biggest problems are best addressed by teams, Berkeley Lab is committed to groundbreaking research focused on discovery science and solutions for abundant and reliable energy supplies. The lab’s expertise spans materials, chemistry, physics, biology, earth and environmental science, mathematics, and computing. Researchers from around the world rely on the lab’s world-class scientific facilities for their own pioneering research. Berkeley Lab is a multiprogram national laboratory managed by the University of California for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory llnl.gov Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory is supporting the U.S. Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission by building AI-enabled capabilities and leveraging its high-performance computing resources to accelerate design, simulation and manufacturing workflows across national security, fusion energy and advanced materials. Through agentic simulation tools, AI-driven molecular discovery, surrogate modeling and reinforcement learning, LLNL is demonstrating how closed-loop discovery workflows can compress development timelines while maintaining rigorous human oversight in support of deterrence and national security missions. LLNL is also advancing AI-enabled production capabilities, including manufacturing diagnostics, additive manufacturing optimization and AI-based quality control systems that connect design to fabrication. Complementary efforts in federated learning, secure coding assistants and knowledge-graph extraction help strengthen the American Science & Security Platform foundation that Genesis seeks to scale. LLNL is also playing a central role in helping establish the Platform, contributing technical leadership across key pillars including Infrastructure, Models, Data and Partnerships, and enabling secure, unified access to computing resources, scientific data and facilities across the DOE enterprise. Together, these initiatives position LLNL as a key contributor to the Genesis Mission and to building a secure, AI-enabled national discovery infrastructure. Los Alamos National Laboratory lanl.gov More information coming soon. National Energy Technology Laboratory netl.doe.gov The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL) is dedicated to innovating and accelerating the nation’s energy solutions in hydrocarbons, geothermal energy, and critical minerals production. With research sites in Albany, Oregon; Morgantown, West Virginia; and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, NETL operates as one laboratory to apply its expertise in subsurface materials and processes, materials engineering, energy conversion, systems analysis, computational science, and program deployment to implement DOE programs across the nation and advance energy technologies. The Lab further strengthens its impact by engaging with industry, academia, and other stakeholders through four strategically located Centers of Excellence: Coal, Critical Minerals and Advanced Alloys, Oil & Gas, and Geothermal. Through its collaborations and world-class research, NETL is strengthening national energy security and contributing to an America that leads the world with affordable, reliable, and secure energy to fuel human prosperity. NETL supports the Genesis Mission through leadership and technical expertise. NETL personnel serve on the Data Leadership Pillar's expert advisory team and have been instrumental in fostering interagency collaboration and establishing partnership agreements with Genesis Mission leadership. As part of the Modeling Consortium, NETL co-leads the CM2US seed modeling team, bringing key critical minerals and materials expertise to the resource discovery, materials discovery, and supply resiliency foundation modeling effort. NETL also actively informs and supports the Integrated Partnership Provisioning Framework, ensuring robust federal partnership agreements, and leads the data governance task team under the Database Services effort, developing recommendations for open data policies, AI-readiness, data provenance, and security strategies. NETL's Energy Data eXchange (EDX) is a key infrastructure partner for Genesis Mission's American Science Cloud (AmSC) platform, integrating millions of public-facing data resources. National Laboratory of the Rockies nlr.gov More information coming soon. Oak Ridge National Laboratory ornl.gov As the largest science and energy laboratory for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) is leveraging AI across its scientific portfolio to strengthen the nation’s energy, security, and competitiveness. ORNL researchers are embedding AI directly into scientific workflows, developing explainable methods that deliver near-real-time insight in areas such as quantum materials, nuclear energy, and cybersecurity. This work moves beyond traditional data analysis toward autonomous science, where AI helps guide experiments, modeling, and decision-making to reduce time to solution. In parallel, ORNL is developing secure-by-design architectures with built-in guardrails to help protect against misuse and adversarial threats. To enable the Genesis Mission, ORNL is charting new pathways for AI-driven science through the American Science Cloud, a secure, connected, science-optimized platform linking DOE computing and experimental facilities. These advances are possible through ORNL’s exascale computing resources. In addition to the Frontier exascale system at ORNL, two new systems—Lux and Discovery—will advance the Genesis Mission. Planned for 2026, Lux will expand DOE’s near-term AI capacity and accelerate progress on Genesis priorities including fusion, fission, materials, quantum, advanced manufacturing, and the grid. Expected in 2028, Discovery will advance high-performance modeling and simulation integrated with AI, while paving the way for the convergence of high-performance computing (HPC), AI, and quantum computing. By advancing the Genesis Mission, ORNL is helping ensure AI remains a secure, reliable partner in discovery and that the United States continues to lead scientifically and economically. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory pnnl.gov Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) is a key partner in the Genesis Mission, the Department of Energy’s integrated ecosystem to accelerate discovery and strengthen U.S. leadership in AI-powered science. Drawing on its deep expertise in the design and application of AI, novel computing paradigms, and fundamental science, PNNL is creating AI solutions to aid autonomous discovery science in chemistry, materials, and biology, speed environmental permitting, and ensure reliable, secure energy grids. Together, these efforts and more make PNNL a transformational AI engine advancing the nation’s scientific, energy, and national security missions. Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory pppl.gov A U.S. Department of Energy National Laboratory managed by Princeton University, the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL) is tackling the world’s toughest science and technology challenges using plasma, the fourth state of matter. The Lab conducts essential research across a full range of plasma applications, whether it’s developing fusion as a potentially limitless power source, creating the next generation of materials for microelectronics and quantum sensors and devices, or electrifying chemical and materials manufacturing processes. PPPL’s research brings together theory, computation, and experimentation to advance plasma sciences and the development of practical fusion energy. Across its departments, PPPL integrates foundational plasma physics, high-fidelity simulation, AI, and large-scale experimental research to understand and control complex, multi-scale plasma behavior. This work spans predictive modeling of plasma stability, the development of advanced computational frameworks and physics-informed AI, and experimental validation across a global network of tokamak facilities. By combining data from world-leading experiments with advanced modeling and machine learning, PPPL is building a data-rich laboratory that accelerates scientific discovery, supports reactor design, and drives progress toward commercially viable fusion energy. We’re a proud partner of the Genesis Mission, using our deep expertise in AI, computational modeling, and digital engineering to advance U.S. competitiveness and national security. Our involvement with the Genesis Mission is primarily focused on using AI for fusion — speeding the development of a fusion pilot plant. We’re developing a new computational infrastructure called STELLAR AI to speed up computer simulations, a digital twin or virtual model of the Lab’s primary fusion experiment: the National Spherical Torus Experiment-Upgrade (NSTX-U), and developing critical surrogate and foundation models for fusion systems. PPPL also brings together experts from around the world to explore how AI is accelerating the path to commercial fusion power with the AI4Fusion Colloquium, an online lecture series. Sandia National Laboratories sandia.gov Sandia National Laboratories is a federally funded research and development center that supports the national security mission of the United States through science, engineering, and technology development. Within the Genesis Mission Consortium, Sandia’s role is centered on applying artificial intelligence, advanced computing, and digital engineering capabilities to high-consequence national security problems, particularly those relevant to the National Nuclear Security Administration. Sandia brings a combination of mission depth and technical breadth that is unique to Genesis. This includes expertise in weapons engineering, digital engineering, high-performance computing, modeling and simulation, advanced manufacturing, data systems, and secure mission execution. Sandia also has strong experience integrating research and development capabilities into operational mission environments, which is essential for translating AI concepts into usable tools and workflows. In the Genesis Mission, Sandia is contributing in both platform development and mission application. On the platform side, Sandia supports the development of infrastructure, models, and data capabilities needed to enable secure, mission-relevant AI use across the complex. On the application side, Sandia is helping define and execute high-impact use cases and Mission Science and Technology Challenges, including areas related to design and production integration, engineering workflow acceleration, manufacturing, data exploitation, and safety-basis modernization. Sandia’s contribution to the Consortium is not limited to technical development. The laboratory also plays an important coordinating role by helping connect mission users, platform developers, and partner institutions across the tri-lab and DOE/NNSA environment. Through this combination of mission understanding, technical execution, and systems integration, Sandia is positioned to help ensure the Genesis Mission delivers practical, scalable capability in support of national security and broader government needs. Savannah River National Laboratory srnl.gov Savannah River National Laboratory brings decades of expertise in nuclear materials management, environmental cleanup, national security, and advanced chemical processing to the Department of Energy’s Genesis Mission. SRNL researchers and their partners are committed to driving the development of AI models to accelerate research and development in key national mission areas. As one of the 17 national laboratories mobilized for this historic endeavor, SRNL harnesses the power of artificial intelligence to advance multidisciplinary applied sciences that support critical DOE and NNSA missions. This includes advancements in nuclear and critical materials, tritium, and isotope sciences vital for developing weapons production technology and securing the nation. Our work directly enhances national security, environmental stewardship, and energy resilience, ultimately strengthening America's leadership and competitiveness. SRNL’s new Advanced Manufacturing Collaborative is a state-of-the-art facility among the lab’s myriad capabilities available to support Genesis Mission success. The AMC will build partnerships with government, academia and industry at local, regional and national levels. Working together with these sectors, the AMC will serve as an innovation incubator that will commercialize solutions to real-world challenges. The Genesis Mission exemplifies the spirit of discovery and collaboration that defines SRNL. Together, we are advancing the solutions that will define the next era of innovation. Learn more about SRNL's featured initiatives for the Genesis Mission at https://www.srnl.gov/srnl-genesis-mission/ . SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory slac.stanford.edu SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, operated by Stanford University for the DOE Office of Science, explores how the universe works at the biggest, smallest and fastest scales and invents powerful tools used by scientists around the globe. Our research helps solve real-world problems and advances the interests of the nation. SLAC’s premier facilities produce vast and uniquely varied scientific data sets that illuminate our world from the grand scale of the cosmos to the smallest scales of the motions of electrons. These data – along with the SLAC-Stanford ecosystem's expertise in algorithm development and its world-leading domain scientists – will fuel the AI revolution in science. SLAC’s contributions to the Genesis Mission bring together advanced computing infrastructure, AI innovation, and data from world-leading scientific facilities to power the next generation of discovery. These coordinated efforts span fields from cosmology and particle physics to materials, catalysis, and critical mineral supply chains, and from accelerator control systems to time-resolved multi-modal data acquisition, strengthening U.S. leadership in AI-enabled science and technology. Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility jlab.org More information coming soon. National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) Plants and Sites Kansas City National Security Campus kcnsc.doe.gov Kansas City National Security Campus (KCNSC) is one of eight sites that comprise the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA). Our primary focus is manufacturing 80 percent of non-nuclear components that go into the nuclear stockpile. Along with safeguarding the country’s nuclear weapons, the KCNSC team leads other missions for the Department of Energy including providing products and services that support proliferation deterrence, supply chain management, and responsiveness to global threats. Nevada National Security Sites nnss.gov The Nevada National Security Sites (NNSS), part of the U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE) National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), is an enterprise of special-purpose, multi-mission, high-hazard experimentation facilities delivering technical and service solutions in partnership with the National Laboratories. Our collaborative work supports the government’s most important national security missions. Pantex pantex.energy.gov As the cornerstone of the nation’s Nuclear Security Enterprise, Pantex applies unique capabilities to ensure the effectiveness of the U.S. nuclear stockpile in support of the Nation’s nuclear deterrent. We accomplish this through executing nuclear explosive assembly and disassembly, special nuclear material testing and evaluations, and manufacturing and assessing high explosives at our historic site. The Pantex mission has grown over the decades as other facilities closed and responsibilities for life-extension, surveillance, assembly and high explosives operations were moved to the site. Since 1975, Pantex has been the nation’s primary assembly, disassembly, retrofit, and life-extension center for nuclear weapons. The last new nuclear weapon was completed in 1991. Since then, Pantex has safely dismantled thousands of weapons retired from the stockpile by the military and placed the resulting plutonium pits in interim storage. Operations at Pantex are primarily conducted on 2,000 acres of the 18,000-acre site. Pantex has approximately 650 buildings, including specialized facilities in which maintenance, modification, disassembly, and assembly operations are conducted. The Pantex Plant maintains its own water-treatment, sewage, and steam-generating plants. Five wind turbines, each over 400 feet tall, generate enough power to support more than 60 percent of the Pantex Plant’s annual energy. The strength of Pantex lies in the dedication and patriotic commitment of its more than 4,700 full-time personnel. Savannah River Site public.srs.gov As a National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) stewarded plant, dedicated to maintaining the highest possible safety and security standards, the Savannah River Site (SRS) is responsible for supporting our nation’s nuclear defense through its Savannah River Tritium Enterprise and its pit production mission; preventing nuclear weapon proliferation; environmental stewardship and cleanup; waste management; and disposition of nuclear materials. SRS is exploring tools, such as AI, to aid in innovation across its missions by helping to accelerate and de-risk work. Our vision is to use these tools to enhance efficiency, ensure safety, and unlock new operational capabilities. Y-12 National Security Complex y12.doe.gov The Y-12 National Security Complex is a premier manufacturing facility dedicated to making our nation and the world a safer place and plays a vital role in the Department of Energy’s Nuclear Security Enterprise. Y-12 helps ensure a safe and effective U.S. nuclear weapons deterrent. We also retrieve and store nuclear materials, fuel the nation’s naval reactors, and perform complementary work for other government and private-sector entities. Since 1943, Y-12 has played a key role in strengthening our country’s national security and reducing the global threat from weapons of mass destruction. Y-12 has evolved to become the complex the nation looks to for support in protecting America's future, developing innovative solutions in manufacturing technologies, prototyping, safeguards and security, technical computing and environmental stewardship. The Genesis Mission Consortium is administered by RTI International (operating as TechWerx), a partnership intermediary for the U.S. Department of Energy. Contact us at: info@genesismissionconsortium.org Terms of Use Privacy Policy About Genesis Mission DOE National Labs Contact us at: info@genesismissionconsortium.org Terms of Use Privacy Policy DOE National Labs 