 Fact Sheet: President Donald J. Trump Unveils the Genesis Mission to Accelerate AI for Scientific Discovery – The White House Menu Search Search for: Scroll Left News Gallery Livestream Election Integrity SAVE America Trump Accounts Ratepayer Protection Contact News Contact Election Integrity SAVE America Trump Accounts Gallery Livestream Investments Scroll Right Close News Featured Releases Aliens Lab Leak: The True Origins of Covid-19 January 6: A Date Which Will Live in Infamy Arrested: Worst of the Worst This Is Our Why Criminal Aliens Receiving Medicaid The JFK Files The RFK Files Briefings & Statements Fact Sheets Presidential Actions Executive Orders Nominations & Appointments Presidential Memoranda Proclamations Remarks Research Administration President Donald J. Trump First Lady Melania Trump Vice President JD Vance Second Lady Usha Vance The Cabinet Executive Office of The President Office of Management and Budget Office of Science and Technology Policy Council of Economic Advisors Office of the National Cyber Director Office of National Drug Control Policy Council on Environmental Quality Media Photo Gallery Video Library Livestream White House Wire Media Offenders Arcade Priorities Top Priorities Lead the World in AI Grow the Economy Strengthen National Security Reform Government (DOGE) Make America Healthy Again Secure the Border Unleash American Energy Support Public Safety Protect Religious Liberty Key Initiatives Election Integrity The SAVE America Act Working Families Tax Cuts Ratepayer Protection Pledge Fraud Task Force Science: A New Golden Age School Choice Freedom 250 AI.Gov Crypto FIFA Agriculture Restoring Maritime Dominance Fostering the Future Summer Reading Challenge Make America Healthy Again The MAHA Report The Great Healthcare Plan TrumpRx Eat Real Food Presidential Physical Fitness Test Council on Sports, Fitness, and Nutrition Investments Major Investments in America Trump Accounts for Children Trump IRA The Trump Gold Card Pledge to America’s Youth Wins and Achievements About The White House A Timeline Our Government America’s Founding Freedom 250 The Founders Museum America’s Founding Fathers The Story of America: Video Series Road to Liberty: Video Series Signers of the Declaration of Independence Presidential Walk of Fame Holidays at The White House Christmas at The White House The White House Easter Egg Roll Get Involved Contact The White House Presidential Greetings Visit The White House Download the White House App Apply for an Internship Find Your Representative SAVE America Stay Informed Email Updates Text WIN to 45470 for Alerts Download the White House App Follow on Social Media Featured Featured Official White House App 365 Days of Wins About President Trump About Vice President Vance 365 Days of Wins Official White House App The Great Healthcare Plan INVESTMENT ANNOUNCEMENTS White House Wire First Year in Office America's Founding East Wing Expansion View Full Video Contact The White House X Instagram TikTok Share Icon Share Icon Facebook YouTube Fact Sheets Fact Sheet: President Donald J. Trump Unveils the Genesis Mission to Accelerate AI for Scientific Discovery The White House November 24, 2025 USHERING IN A NEW ERA OF DISCOVERY: Today, President Donald J. Trump signed an Executive Order launching the Genesis Mission, a new national effort to use artificial intelligence (AI) to transform how scientific research is conducted and accelerate the speed of scientific discovery. The Genesis Mission charges the Secretary of Energy with leveraging our National Laboratories to unite America’s brightest minds, most powerful computers, and vast scientific data into one cooperative system for research. The Order directs the Department of Energy to create a closed-loop AI experimentation platform that integrates our Nation’s world-class supercomputers and unique data assets to generate scientific foundation models and power robotic laboratories. The Order instructs the Assistant to the President for Science and Technology (APST) to coordinate the national initiative and the integration of data and infrastructure from across the Federal government. The Secretary of Energy, APST, and the Special Advisor for AI & Crypto will collaborate with academia and private-sector innovators to support and enhance the Genesis Mission. Priority areas of focus include the greatest scientific challenges of our time that can dramatically improve our Nation’s national, economic, and health security, including biotechnology, critical materials, nuclear fission and fusion energy, space exploration, quantum information science, and semiconductors and microelectronics. HARNESSING AI FOR OUR NATIONAL SECURITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT : With the Genesis Mission, the Trump Administration intends to dramatically expand the productivity and impact of Federal research and development within a decade. Despite research budgets soaring since the 1990s, scientific progress has stalled—new drug approvals have declined, and more researchers are needed to achieve the same outputs. Harnessing AI as a scientific tool will revolutionize the way scientific research is conducted. For example, AI technologies can generate models of protein structures and novel materials, design and analyze experiments, and aggregate and generate new data faster and more effectively. Research that once took years could now take weeks or months. To do this, AI needs large amounts of organized and high-quality data and significant computing power. These datasets and computing technology already exist within DOE’s National Laboratories. With the Genesis Mission, the Trump Administration is bringing the power of AI to bear on our already expansive data infrastructure and creating a platform for multiple Federal research agencies and the private sector to collaborate to achieve breakthroughs currently thought impossible, and to win and stay ahead in the AI race. STRENGTHENING AMERICA’S AI DOMINANCE: President Trump continues to prioritize America’s global dominance in AI to usher in a new golden age of human flourishing, economic competitiveness, and national security. In January, President Trump signed an Executive Order to reverse harmful Biden Administration AI policies and enhance America’s global AI dominance. In April, President Trump signed an Executive Order to advance AI education for America’s youth. In July, President Trump signed Executive Orders to prevent woke AI in the Federal government and promote the export of full-stack American AI technologies. In July, President Trump issued America’s AI Action Plan, a policy agenda identifying nearly a hundred Federal actions to accelerate American AI innovation, build AI infrastructure at home, and lead in international diplomacy and security. The AI Action Plan includes recommended policies for investing in AI-enabled science, including the direction to build world-class data sets. In September, the President signed an Executive Order on harnessing AI innovation to unlock cures for pediatric cancer, using the Childhood Cancer Data Initiative, which President Trump initially established in 2019 to collect, generate, and analyze childhood cancer data. Related President Trump Launches the Genesis Mission to Accelerate AI for Scientific Discovery Releases November 24, 2025 Trump Administration Announces More Than $5 Billion for the Genesis Mission, a National Mission on AI for Science Releases July 22, 2026 Launching the Genesis Mission Presidential Actions , Executive Orders November 24, 2025 Fact Sheet: President Donald J. Trump Prioritizes Harnessing American AI Innovation to Unlock Cures for Pediatric Cancer Fact Sheets September 30, 2025 Fact Sheet: President Donald J. Trump Ushers in the Next Frontier of Quantum Innovation Fact Sheets June 22, 2026 1 2 3 … 116 Next Page About Administration Contact Internships Stay Informed Privacy Policy Media News Gallery Video Library Media Offenders White House Wire Initiatives Freedom 250 Investments Working Families Tax Cuts AI.Gov DOGE Subscribe to the WH Newsletter Please leave blank. Click here or text 45470 to receive updates Download The White House App: Available On The App Store Get It On Google Play Get Updates Straight to Your Desktop Available On Download Browser Extension Enable Desktop Notifications X Instagram TikTok Share Icon Share Icon Facebook YouTube Your browser does not support the audio element. Click to listen 0:00 3:08 0.75× 1× 1.5× 2× Notifications 